
Supreme Court of India
Indian Council Of Legal Aid &amp; ... vs State Of Orissa &amp; Anr on 22 January, 2008Bench: Cji K. Balakrishnan, R. V. Raveendran, J. M. Panchal
           CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  42 of 1997

PETITIONER:
Indian Council of Legal Aid &amp; Advice &amp; Ors.

RESPONDENT:
State of Orissa &amp; Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/01/2008

BENCH:
CJI K. G. Balakrishnan,R. V. Raveendran &amp; J. M. Panchal

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R 
WITH 
TC(C) Nos.9-10/1997


	This writ petition has been filed highlighting the problems of residents 
of KBK districts in State of Orissa and seeking directions to prevent 
starvation deaths and occurance of famines etc. 

	On 28.4.1997, this Hon'ble Court noted that the National Human 
Rights Commissions (for short 'NHRC') was seized of the matter and 
recorded the submission of the learned Advocate General of State of Orissa 
that the State Government will implement all directions including those 
interim in nature, given by NHRC. In the subsequent order dated 21.7.1997, 
the petitioners were permitted to approach the NHRC with suggestions, for 
interim directions. NHRC evolved short term and long term schemes to 
empower the people of this region and also monitored implementation of 
such scheme for more than eight years. It submitted several interim reports 
to this Court. On 10.3.2003, this Court noted : 

"It is brought to our notice that in the light of the progress made in the 
matter before the NHRC, the matter should continue to be considered by 
the NHRC itself and further orders are not required by this Court at this 
stage. It is ordered accordingly. The report filed so far shall, therefore, 
stand accepted."

	Various recommendations made by the NHRC have empowered the 
people residing in the locality by providing them with land, irrigation 
facilities and opportunity to live with some dignity. The monitoring 
mechanism suggested by NHRC also ensured that the recommendations 
were implemented. Both the Union of India and the State Government co-
operated well and with the joint efforts of all concerned, it is stated that a 
perceptible change has been brought about in the KBK area, which had 
earlier been termed as a problem beyond redemption. 

	The final report with  appropriate recommendations has been given by 
NHRC on 30.8.2006. These recommendations will go a long way in 
improving the living conditions of KBK region. The recommendations in the 
final report of NHRC have been accepted by the State Government. The 
State Government has also agreed for an effective monitoring mechanism 
suggested by NHRC to ensure that the suggestions made by the NHRC are 
implemented properly and continuously.   

	In the circumstances, we are of the view that no further directions are 
required in this petition and the connected transferred case. The writ petition 
and transferred case are disposed of accordingly recording our appreciation 
for the efforts taken by the petitioners. 

	If there is any difficulty, the petitioners would be at liberty to 
approach this Court.  

