
Supreme Court of India
Kaliram &amp; Ors vs State Of M.P. &amp; Anr on 18 February, 2008Bench: P.P. Naolekar, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  335 of 2008

PETITIONER:
KALIRAM &amp; ORS.

RESPONDENT:
STATE OF M.P. &amp; ANR.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/02/2008

BENCH:
P.P. Naolekar &amp; Lokeshwar Singh Panta

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT


O R D E R
(ARISING OUT OF SLP (CRIMINAL) NO.4672 OF 2007)


	Leave granted.
	Heard learned counsel for the parties.
	In the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court was not right in 
cancelling the bail in a Miscellaneous Criminal Case filed by some other accused 
persons particularly so when the State has neither moved an application for 
cancellation of the bail of the accused-appellants before the Sessions Court nor has 
preferred revision before the High Court for cancellation of the same.  This Court 
has held in Raghubir Singh and Others vs. State of Bihar, (1986) 4 SCC 481 that bail 
can be cancelled where the accused (i) misuses his liberty by indulging in similar 
criminal activity, (ii) interferes with the course of investigation, (iii) attempts to 
tamper with evidence or witnesses, (iv) threatens witnesses or indulges in similar 
activities which would hamper smooth investigation, (v) there is likelihood of his 
fleeing to another country, (vi) attempts to make himself scarce by going 
underground or becoming unavailable to the investigation agency, (vii) attempts to 
place himself beyond the reach of the sureties, etc. 
  	For the aforesaid reasons, we set aside the impugned order of the High Court 
whereby the bail of the accused-appellants has been cancelled. The accused-
appellants shall be released on bail  on their furnishing personal bonds in the sum of 
Rs.25,000/- each with one surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the Sessions 
Court.  We, however, make it clear that it will be open for the State to move an 
appropriate application before the Sessions Court for cancellation of the bail granted 
to the accused-appellants which shall be considered on its own merits. 
	The appeal stands disposed of accordingly.

