
Supreme Court of India
Munshi Lal (Dead) By Lrs vs Dist. Judge, Aligarh &amp; Anr on 14 February, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Harjit Singh Bedi
                          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIAD
                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                 CIVIL APPEAL NO.6709 OF 2001

    Munshi Lal (Dead) by Lrs.                            ...
Appellant

    Versus

    Distt. Judge, Aligarh &amp; Anr.                 ...Respondents

                           ORDER

         This appeal has been filed against the final judgment

    and order dated 28th of April, 1995 passed by the High

    Court of Judicature at Allahabad in Civil Misc. Writ Petition

    NO.11097 of 1995 by which the High Court had dismissed

    the writ petition filed by the appellant against an order

    dated 25th of February, 1995 of the Appellate Authority,

    Urban Land Ceiling, (District Judge), Aligarh.

         By the appellate order, the claim of the appellant that

    in determining ceiling area of the petitioner the declaration

    made to the effect that the land of the petitioner was

    declared surplus was incorrect. Since the Urban Land

    Ceiling Act has already been repealed and the Urban Land
(Ceiling and Regulation) Repeal Act, 1999 has now come

into force and in view of Section 4 of the said Act the

proceedings under the Act has already abated. In our view,

Section 4 of the Act has no manner of application in view of

the fact that no proceeding related to any order to be made

or purported to be made under the Principal Act pending

immediately before the commencement of the Act was

pending in any court, tribunal or other authority. In this

case, no proceeding was pending at the time of repeal of the

Act by which the proceeding could be said to have been

abated.

     That being the position, we are not in a position to

hold that in view of Section 4 of the Act, the appeal has

abated. So far as the impugned order is concerned, we do

not find any infirmity in the same and thus the appeal is

dismissed. There will be no order as to costs.


                                     .............................J.
                                     [Tarun Chatterjee]


New Delhi;                           .............................J.
February 14, 2008.                   [Harjit Singh Bedi]

