
Supreme Court of India
Manjit Prakash &amp; Ors vs Shobha Devi &amp; Anr on 18 July, 2008Author: D A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Harjit Singh Bedi
                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1113 OF 2008
        (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 4205 of 2007)




Manjit Prakash &amp; Ors.                     ...   Appellants


                             Vs.


Shobha Devi &amp; Anr.                        ...   Respondents




                        JUDGMENT

DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.   Leave granted.

2.   Appellants challenge the order passed by a learned

Single Judge of the Patna High Court cancelling the bail


                                                             1
granted to them by order dated 7.9.2006 in Criminal

Miscellaneous   No. 10719      of 2006. The        application for

cancellation of bail was filed by the respondent No.1.

Appellants 1, 2 &amp; 3 are arrayed as accused Nos. 1, 2 &amp; 4.

Five persons were granted bail by order dated 7.9.2006 in

Criminal Misc. Case No. 10719 of 2006.        By the impugned

order the learned Single Judge directed cancellation of bail

granted to the present appellants while holding that the two

others being ladies there was no need to cancel the bail

granted to them.

2.    Though various points were urged in support of the

     appeal primarily it was submitted that no reasons have

     been given for canceling the bail.

3.   Learned counsel for the respondent No.1-complainant

     submitted that though the order canceling bail has not

     elaborately dealt with the circumstances to warrant

     cancellation of bail, the same is in order.

                                                              2
4.   The appellants and the other two in respect of whom the

     High Court has not interfered, were granted provisional

     bail by order dated 3.5.2006 which came to be confirmed

     on 7.9.2006. It was stated that the husband and wife

     have been residing together in the matrimonial home.

     Earlier there was a suit for restitution of conjugal rights

     filed by appellant No. 2 who withdrew the same after the

     provisional    bail     was   confirmed    and    instituted

     Matrimonial case No. 34 of 2006 for divorce. According

     to the complaint on 10.10.2006, there was an incident

     and therefore the bail was to be cancelled.       The High

     Court, as rightly contended by learned counsel for the

     appellants, has not indicated the reasons for directing

     cancellation of bail.

6.   It is trite law that the considerations for grant of bail and

cancellation of bail stand on different footings. By a majority

judgment in Aslam Babalal Desai v. State of Maharashtra the

circumstances when bail granted can be cancelled were

highlighted in the following words: (SCC pp. 289-90, para 11):

                                                              3
   "11. On a conjoint reading of Sections 57
and 167 of the Code it is clear that the
legislative object was to ensure speedy
investigation after a person has been taken in
custody. It expects that the investigation
should be completed within 24 hours and if
this is not possible within 15 days and failing
that within the time stipulated in clause (a) of
the proviso to Section 167(2) of the Code. The
law expects that the investigation must be
completed with dispatch and the role of the
Magistrate is to oversee the course of
investigation and to prevent abuse of the law
by the investigating agency. As stated earlier,
the legislative history shows that before the
introduction of the proviso to Section 167(2)
the maximum time allowed to the investigating
agency was 15 days under sub-section (2) of
Section 167 failing which the accused could be
enlarged on bail. From experience this was
found to be insufficient particularly in complex
case and hence the proviso was added to
enable the Magistrate to detain the accused in
custody for a period exceeding 15 days but not
exceeding the outer limit fixed under the
proviso (a) to that sub-section. We may here
mention that the period prescribed by the
proviso    has    been    enlarged    by   State
amendments and wherever there is such
enlargement, the proviso will have to be read
accordingly. The purpose and object of
providing for the release of the accused under
sub-section (2) of Section 167 on the failure of
the investigating agency completing the
investigation within the extended time allowed
by the proviso was to instil a sense of urgency
in the investigating agency to complete the


                                                   4
investigation    promptly    and within the
statutory time frame. The deeming fiction of
correlating the release on bail under sub-
section (2) of Section 167 with Chapter XXXIII
i.e. Sections 437 and 439 of the Code, was to
treat the order as one passed under the latter
provisions. Once the order of release is by
fiction of law an order passed under Section
437(1) or (2) or Section 439(1) it follows as a
natural consequence that the said order can
be cancelled under sub-section (5) of Section
437 or sub-section (2) of Section 439 on
considerations relevant for cancellation of an
order thereunder. As stated in Raghubir Singh
v. State of Bihar2 the grounds for cancellation
under Sections 437(5) and 439(2) are identical,
namely, bail granted under Section 437(1) or
(2) or Section 439(1) can be cancelled where (i)
the accused misuses his liberty by indulging
in similar criminal activity, (ii) interferes with
the course of investigation, (iii) attempts to
tamper with evidence or witnesses, (iv)
threatens witnesses or indulges in similar
activities which would hamper smooth
investigation, (v) there is likelihood of his
fleeing to another country, (vi) attempts to
make himself scarce by going underground or
becoming unavailable to the investigating
agency, (vii) attempts to place himself beyond
the reach of his surety etc. These grounds are
illustrative and not exhaustive. It must also be
remembered that rejection of bail stands on
one footing but cancellation of bail is a harsh
order because it interferes with the liberty of
the individual and hence it must not be lightly
resorted to."

                                                     5
7.    It is, therefore, clear that when a person to whom bail

has been granted either tries to interfere with the course of

justice or attempts to tamper with evidence or witnesses or

threatens witnesses or indulges in similar activities which

would hamper smooth investigation or trial, bail granted can

be cancelled. Rejection of bail stands on one footing, but

cancellation of bail is a harsh order because it takes away the

liberty of an individual granted and is not to be lightly resorted

to.

8.    In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu

Yadav and Anr. (2004 (7) SCC 528) In para 11 it was noted as

follows:

           "11. The law in regard to grant or refusal of
           bail is very well settled. The court granting bail
           should exercise its discretion in a judicious
           manner and not as a matter or course. Though
           at the stage of granting bail a detailed
           examination of evidence and elaborate
           documentation of the merit of the case need
           not be undertaken, there is a need to indicate
           in such orders reasons for prima facie
           concluding why bail was being granted
           particularly where the accused is charged of


                                                                6
           having committed a serious offence. Any order
           devoid of such reasons would suffer from non-
           application of mind. It is also necessary for the
           court granting bail to consider among other
           circumstances, the following factors also
           before granting bail; they are:

           (a)   The nature of accusation and the severity
                 of punishment in case of conviction and
                 the nature of supporting evidence.

           (b)   Reasonable apprehension of tampering
                 with the witness or apprehension of
                 threat to the complainant.

           (c)   Prima facie satisfaction of the court in
                 support of the charge. (See Ram Govind
                 Upadhyay v. Sudarshan Singh (2002 (3)
                 SC 598) and Puran v. Rambilas (2001 (6)
                 SCC 338).

9.    It was also noted in the said case that the conditions laid

down under Section 437 (1)(i) are sine qua non for granting

bail even under Section 439 of the Code.

10.   In para 14 it was noted as follows:

           "14. We have already noticed from the
           arguments of learned counsel for the appellant
           that the present accused had earlier made
           seven applications for grant of bail which were


                                                               7
rejected by the High Court and some such
rejections have been affirmed by this Court
also. It is seen from the records that when the
fifth application for grant of bail was allowed
by the High Court, the same was challenged
before this Court and this Court accepted the
said challenge by allowing the appeal filed by
the Union of India and another and cancelled
the bail granted by the High Court as per the
order of this Court made in Criminal Appeal
No. 745 of 2001 dated 25-7-2001. While
cancelling the said bail this Court specifically
held that the fact that the present accused
was in custody for more than one year (at that
time) and the further fact that while rejecting
an earlier application, the High Court had
given liberty to renew the bail application in
future, were not grounds envisaged under
Section 437(1)(i) of the Code. This Court also
in specific terms held that the condition laid
down under Section 437(1)(i) is sine qua non
for granting bail even under Section 439 of the
Code. In the impugned order it is noticed that
the High Court has given the period of
incarceration already undergone by the
accused and the unlikelihood of trial
concluding in the near future as grounds
sufficient to enlarge the accused on bail, in
spite of the fact that the accused stands
charged of offences punishable with life
imprisonment or even death penalty. In such
cases, in our opinion, the mere fact that the
accused has undergone certain period of
incarceration (three years in this case) by itself
would not entitle the accused to being
enlarged on bail, nor the fact that the trial is
not likely to be concluded in the near future
either by itself or coupled with the period of
incarceration would be sufficient for enlarging

                                                     8
           the appellant on bail when the gravity of the
           offence alleged is severe and there are
           allegations of tampering with the witnesses by
           the accused during the period he was on
           bail."

11.   Even though the re-appreciation of the evidence as done

by the Court granting bail is to be avoided, the Court dealing

with an application for cancellation of bail under Section 439

(2) can consider whether irrelevant materials were taken into

consideration. That is so because it is not known as to what

extent the irrelevant materials weighed with the Court for

accepting the prayer for bail.

12.   In Puran v. Rambilas and Anr. (2001 (6) SCC 338) it was

noted as follows:

           "11. Further, it is to be kept in mind that the
           concept of setting aside the unjustified illegal
           or perverse order is totally different from the
           concept of cancelling the bail on the ground
           that the accused has misconducted himself or
           because of some new facts requiring such
           cancellation. This position is made clear by
           this Court in Gurcharan Singh v. State (Delhi



                                                              9
            Admn.). In that case the Court observed as
            under: (SCC p.     124, para 16)


                "If, however, a Court of Session had
                admitted an accused person to bail, the
                State has two options. It may move the
                Sessions     Judge     if   certain    new
                circumstances have arisen which were
                not earlier known to the State and
                necessarily, therefore, to that court. The
                State may as well approach the High
                Court being the superior court under
                Section 439(2) to commit the accused to
                custody. When, however, the State is
                aggrieved by the order of the Sessions
                Judge granting bail and there are no new
                circumstances that have cropped up
                except those already existing, it is futile
                for the State to move the Sessions Judge
                again and it is competent in law to move
                the High Court for cancellation of the
                bail. This position follows from the
                subordinate position of the Court of
                Session vis-`-vis the High Court."

13.   The perversity as highlighted in Puran's case (supra) can

also flow from the fact that as noted above, irrelevant

materials    have   been   taken   into   consideration   adding

vulnerability to the order granting bail. The         irrelevant

materials should be of a substantial nature and not of a trivial

nature.

                                                              10
14.   Since the High Court has not indicated any reasons for

directing cancellation of bail, the impugned order cannot be

maintained and is set aside.    The matter is remitted to the

High Court to decide the matter afresh and dispose of the

application filed. We make it clear that we have not expressed

any opinion on the merits of the case.

14.The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.

                                     .................................J.
                                     (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                     ..................................J.
                                     (H.S. BEDI)
New Delhi,
July 18, 2008




                                                                      11

