
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs Satrohan on 14 July, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
                                                       REPORTABLE

                IN THE SURPEME COURT OF INDIA

               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1145 OF 2001


Union of India                                    ...Appellant

                               Versus

Satrohan                                          ...Respondent


                          JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.      Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of the

acquittal passed by learned Single Judge of the Allahabad

High Court, Lucknow Bench, directing acquittal of the

respondent (hereinafter referred to as the `accused') by setting

aside    the   judgment   of   conviction   recorded   by   learned

Additional District and Sessions Judge, Lucknow in Criminal

Appeal     No.65 of 1993. The trial Court had convicted          the

respondent for offences punishable under Section 8(c) and 15
of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985

(in short the `Act') and sentenced to undergo RI for 10 years

and fine of rupees one lakh with default stipulation.

2.   Prosecution version in a nutshell is as follows:

     On the basis of secret information Sri Naseem Ahmad, an

Inspector of Narcotics Department along with other officials

raided the house of the respondent on 20.11.1992 at about

8.00 a.m. in village Dadari Jamalpur. The house of the

respondent was searched and from his house 29 bags

containing poppy straws were recovered. The respondent

could not explain legal possession of poppy straws weighing

309 kgs. The respondent was arrested and after investigation

charge sheet was submitted against him. The respondent

denied the possession and ownership of the property in

question and claimed trial.

     The trial Court found the evidence adduced to be clear

and cogent and directed conviction and imposed sentence as


                              2
afore-noted. In appeal, the High Court directed acquittal by a

practically non-reasoned order holding that there was non-

compliance of Sections 42(2) and 50 of the Act. It was noted

that the Narcotics Department has given licence to the father

of the respondent for cultivation of opium and if there had

been recovery of poppy straws it might be relatable to the

ownership of father of the respondent.

3.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

trial Court had relied upon the confession of the accused

respondent and the grounds on which the High Court directed

acquittal are (i) non examination of independent witnesses; (ii)

lack of evidence to show exclusive ownership; and (iii) the

alleged non compliance of Sections 42(2) and 50 of the Act.

4.   It is pointed out that Section 50 is not applicable to the

case. Additionally, under Section 57 secret information has to

be sent and the particulars of seizure and arrest have to be

sent. The records if asked for could have been produced. In

the instant case there is no evidence led or not even any


                              3
question was asked about absence of records. In the

alternative,   the   inspector   was   a   Gazetted   Officer   and,

therefore, even if it is conceded for the sake of argument that

there is any incorrect reference, the acts are covered under

Section 41 and not under Section 42.

5.   Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand

submitted that the confessional statement could not have

been relied upon. The statement was recorded by PW-2 and

by the investigating officer (PW-6) on 20.11.1992. There could

not have been any recording of statement by PW-6 as he was

entrusted with investigation on 3.12.1992. It is pointed out

that the investigating officer was not a Gazetted Officer. Since

authorization was obtained Section 57 comes into play. It is

pointed out that there is licence of the father also. Therefore,

the High Court's order does not suffer from any infirmity.

6.   Section 2(xv) and Section 2(xviii) define "opium' and

"poppy straws" respectively. It is the stand of the respondent

that since there was licence of opium, obviously there is


                                 4
presumption that there was licence of poppy straws.       As a

matter of fact the High Court did not direct acquittal on the

ground that there was licence for poppy straws also. The

evidence on record clearly shows that the expressions "opium"

and "poppy straws" are not interchangeable as contended by

learned counsel for the respondent, as Section 2(xiv) clearly

makes out a distinction between opium and poppy straws. So

far as the role of PW-6 is concerned, it is to be noted that

there is no reference to the stand presently highlighted by the

High Court.

7.   Undisputedly, there are two different entries for opium

and poppy straws. Opium appears at Sl. No.92 while poppy

straws appear at Sl. No.110. The statement of the accused-

respondent in terms of Section 67 throws considerable light

on the controversy. In the statement recorded there was no

retraction and in fact during examination under section 313 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short the `Code')

while answering question No.4 it was stated that there was no

confession. The confessional statement was recorded on


                             5
20.11.1992 and the statement under Section 313 of the Code

was recorded on 6.2.1999. Therefore, there has been no

retraction at any point of time. The position is also clear from

Section 57 of the Code. At the time of production before the

Magistrate, there was no allegation of any torture as presently

submitted. In this connection a few decisions of this Court

need to be noted.

8.   In Kanhaiyalal v. Union of India (2008 (1) SCALE 165) at

para 7 it was noted as follows:

          "7. Since the appellant Kanhaiyalal was
          convicted on the basis of the statement made
          by him under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, a
          question has been raised whether such
          statement made to an officer within the
          meaning of Section 42 of the said Act could be
          treated as a confessional statement and
          whether the accused could be convicted on the
          basis thereof in the absence of any other
          corroborative evidence."

                              6
9.   Similarly in A.K. Mehaboob v. The Intelligence Officer,

Narcotics Control Bueau (JT 2001 (1) SC 614) it was observed

as follows:

              "4. Smt. Malini Poduval, learned counsel for
              the appellants contended that Exhibit P-8
              cannot be relied on for more than one reason.
              One is that the said statement had been
              retracted by the accused himself. Second is
              that on 11.8.1994 appellant- Naushad
              informed the Magistrate in writing that the
              said statement had been coaxed out from him.
              The third is that the said retracted confession
              had no corroboration and therefore cannot be
              made the basis for conviction.
              5.    There is nothing to indicate that Exhibit
              P-8 had been elicited from A-2 by any
              coercion, threat or force and therefore the
              learned Single Judge of the High Court had
              spurned down that contention. Regarding the
              complaint alleged to have been made by
              appellant-Naushad on 11.3.1994 we have
              perused it. His case therein was that he
              offered himself to be a witness     in the case
              and some reward was offered for it. It was on
              the said offers that he agreed to sign the said
              statement. It must be remembered that
              appellant-Naushad has no case that when he
              was     produced     before  the     Magistrate,
              immediately after his arrest, he made any
              grievance of any maltreatment administered to
              him by the members of the Narcotics Control
              Bureau. Wisdom downed on him (when the
              complaint dated 11.3.1994 was filed) to put up
              an advance defence against the statement
              given by him under his own signature. Even

                                 7
           then he did not think it necessary to make any
           allegation that any intimidatory tactic, much
           less any third degree method had been applied
           on him. His case in the said complaint that a
           reward was offered to him and hence he
           agreed to sign the statement is contrary to the
           present stand adopted by him that he was
           coerced and threatened to made such a
           statement. The learned Single judge had
           rightly repelled the contentions made on
           behalf of appellant- Naushad relating to
           Exhibit P-8."

10.   The inferential conclusion that the articles seized might

have been recovered by the father's licence is a conclusion

without any foundation and basis.

11.   So far as the fulfillment of the requirement of Section 57

of the Act is concerned it is to be noted that the legal position

was stated by this Court in T. Thomson v. State of Kerala and

Anr. (2002 (9) SCC 618) and in State, NCT of Delhi v.

Malvinder Singh (JT 2007 (9) SC 283). In Malvinder Singh's

case (supra) at para 6, it was observed as follows:

           "6. At this juncture, it would be relevant to
           take note of that has been stated by this Court



                              8
              in T. Thomson v. State of Kerala and Anr. At
              para 5 it was observed as follows:

                        "5. Learned Senior counsel
                  further argued that the record
                  alleged to have been prepared by
                  PW-1     on    getting    information
                  regarding the movement of the
                  appellants has not been produced in
                  court. But he conceded that no
                  motion was made on behalf of the
                  appellants to call for the said
                  record. There is no statutory
                  requirement that such a record
                  should be produced in the Court as
                  a matter of course. We are,
                  therefore, not disposed to upset the
                  finding on that score either."

12.   So far as the applicability of Section 42 is concerned few

decisions need to be noted.

13.   In M. Prabhulal v. The Assistant Director, Directorate of

Revenue Intelligence (JT 2003 (2) Supp SC 459) it was noted

as follows:

              "8. Now, we come to the last and rather more
              serious objections raised on behalf of the
              appellants regarding the non-compliance with
              Section 42 of the NDPS Act vitiating the
              conviction which looks quite formidable but


                                9
only on the first impression and not on its
deeper examination. The contention of Mr R.K.
Jain is that the view of the High Court that
when a Gazetted Officer himself conducts a
search it is not necessary to comply with
Section 42(2) of the Act, is clearly erroneous.
Section 42(2) provides that where an officer
takes down any information in writing under
sub-section (1) or records grounds for his
belief under the proviso thereto, he shall
forthwith send a copy thereof to his immediate
official superior. This was the statutory
provision at the relevant time. By the Narcotic
Drugs      and     Psychotropic       Substances
(Amendment) Act, 2001 which came into force
on 2-10-2001, Section 42(2) was amended
whereunder the information taken down in
writing under sub-section (1) or grounds of
belief recorded under the proviso thereto are
required to be sent within seventy-two hours
to officers' immediate official superior. The
contention is that the officer who searched and
seized the contraband did so on information
received by him as per Ext. PW 1 but the said
information was not forwarded to his superior
officer as contemplated in Section 42(2) of the
NDPS      Act,   thus     vitiating  the   entire
prosecution. Further argues the counsel that
the respondent after grant of bail to the
appellants by the High Court taking into
consideration the non-compliance with Section
42(2) has tried to fill in the lacuna with a view
to show the compliance of this mandatory
provision.

9. The officer who conducted the arrest,
search and seizure was an empowered
Gazetted Officer of the Department. This fact is


                    10
not in dispute. According to Mr Vasdev,
learned Senior Counsel for the respondent,
Section 42(2) is not applicable when an
empowered Gazetted Officer conducts the
arrest, search and seizure. The counsel
submits that there was no obligation on the
officer to comply with the requirement of
Section 42(2) of the NDPS Act. It was also
contended, in the alternative, that Section 42
(2) of the NDPS Act was complied with.

14. Section 41(1) which empowers a
Magistrate to issue warrant for arrest of any
person whom he has reason to believe to have
committed any offence punishable under the
NDPS Act or for search, has not much
relevance for the purpose of considering the
contention. Under Section 41(2) only a
Gazetted Officer can be empowered by the
Central Government or the State Government.
Such empowered officer can either himself
make an arrest or conduct a search or
authorize an officer subordinate to him to do
so but that subordinate officer has to be
superior in rank to a peon, a sepoy or a
constable. Sub-section (3) of Section 41 vests
all the powers of an officer acting under
Section 42 on three types of officers (i) to
whom a warrant under sub-section (1) is
addressed, (ii) the officer who authorized the
arrest or search under sub-section (2) of
Section 41, and (iii) the officer who is so
authorized under sub-section (2) of Section 41.
Therefore, an empowered Gazetted Officer has
also all the powers of Section 42 including the
power of seizure. Section 42 provides for
procedure and power of entry, search, seizure
and arrest without warrant or authorization.

                   11
An empowered officer has the power of entry
into and search of any building, conveyance or
place, break open any door, remove
obstruction, seize contraband, detain, search
and arrest any person between sunrise and
sunset in terms provided in sub-section (1) of
Section 42. In case of an emergent situation,
these powers can also be exercised even
between sunset and sunrise without obtaining
a search warrant or authorization, in terms
provided in the proviso to sub-section (1) of
Section 42. Sub-section (2) of Section 42 is a
mandatory provision. In terms of this provision
a copy of information taken down in writing
under sub-section (1) or ground recorded for
the belief under the proviso thereto, is
required to be sent by the officer to his
immediate superior official. It is clear from
Section 41(2) that the Central Government or
State Government, as the case may be, can
only empower an officer of a gazetted rank who
can either himself act or authorize his
subordinate on the terms stated in the section.
Under sub-section (1) of Section 42, however,
there is no restriction on the Central
Government or the State Government to
empower only a Gazetted Officer. But on an
officer empowered under sub-section (1) of
Section 42, there are additional checks and
balances as provided in the proviso and also
provided in sub-section (2) of Section 42. It is
clear from the language of sub-section (2) of
Section 42 that it applies to an officer
contemplated by sub-section (1) thereof and
not to a Gazetted Officer contemplated by sub-
section (2) of Section 41, when such a
Gazetted Officer himself makes an arrest or
conducts search and seizure. It would be
useful to also notice Section 43 which relates

                   12
           to power of seizure and arrest in a public
           place. Any officer of any of the departments
           mentioned in Section 42 is empowered to seize
           contraband etc. and detain and search a
           person in any public place or in transit on
           existence of ingredient stated in Section 43. It
           can, thus, be seen that Sections 42 and 43 do
           not require an officer to be a Gazetted Officer
           whereas Section 41(2) requires an officer to be
           so. A Gazetted Officer has been differently
           dealt with and more trust has been reposed in
           him can also be seen from Section 50 of the
           NDPS Act which gives a right to a person
           about to be searched to ask for being searched
           in the presence of a Gazetted Officer. The High
           Court is, thus, right in coming to the
           conclusion that since the Gazetted Officer
           himself conducted the search, arrested the
           accused and seized the contraband, he was
           acting under Section 41 and, therefore, it was
           not necessary to comply with Section 42. The
           decisions in State of Punjab v. Balbir Singh,
           Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v. State of
           Gujarat and Beckodan Abdul Rahiman v. State
           of Kerala on the aspects under consideration
           are neither relevant nor applicable."

14.   Section 67 reads as follows:

           "67. Power to call for information, etc.

           Any officer referred   to in Section 42 who is
           authorised in this      behalf by the Central
           Government or a        State Government may,
           during the course of   any enquiry in connection



                              13
           with the contravention of any provision of this
           Act, -

           (a) Call for information from any person for the
           purpose of satisfying himself whether there
           has been any contravention of the provisions
           of this Act or any rule or order made
           thereunder;

           (b) Require any person to produce or deliver
           any document or thing useful or relevant to
           the enquiry;

           (c) Examine any person acquainted with the
           facts and circumstances of the case."

15.   Section 41(2) deals with two situations. One is relatable

to Gazetted Officer while in the other case the Gazetted Officer

may authorize his subordinate to do the relevant act or may

do it himself. Section 41(3) refers to the power under Section

42 which refers to subordinates.

16.   In the confessional statement the accused has clearly

stated about the ownership. So, there has been no retraction

at considerable length of time.

                              14
17.   Above being the position, the High Court was clearly in

error by setting aside the judgment of the trial Court. We set

aside the judgment of the High Court and restore that of the

trial Court. The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.

                                      .................................J.
                                      (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                      .................................J.
                                      (P. SATHASIVAM)
New Delhi,
July 14, 2008




                              15

