
Supreme Court of India
White Machines vs Commissioner Of Central Excise, ... on 21 February, 2008Bench: Ashok Bhan, Dalveer Bhandari
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2155 of 2002

PETITIONER:
White Machines

RESPONDENT:
Commissioner of Central Excise, Delhi

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/02/2008

BENCH:
ASHOK BHAN &amp; DALVEER BHANDARI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2155 OF 2002


	Assessee-appellant (hereinafter referred to as 'the 'assessee') claimed the C.I.Chilled Rolls 
being manufactured by the appellant under chapter heading 84.37 which in turn is exempted 
from the payment of excise duty vide exemption Notification No.56/95-CE dated 16.3.1995.  
	A show cause notice dated 27th September, 1996 was issued to the assessee alleging that the 
assessee first manufactures C.I.castings which are later on captively consumed for producing 
the C.I.Chilled Rolls; that since the assessee was producing intermediary product, it was liable 
to pay the excise duty on the C.I.castings under chapter heading 7207.10.  
	Assessee in reply to the show cause notice had taken the point that C.I.castings which are 
intermediary product were not marketable and, therefore, excise duty could not be levied.  
According to the assessee, C.I.castings are in the process of manufacturing C.I.Chilled Rolls.
CIVIL APPEAL NO.2155 OF 2002
			-2-
	The adjudicating authority in its order dated 29.1.1999 recorded a finding to the following 
effect:

"Both the circulars issued by Board as mentioned above do not speak 
anything about marketability of castings and as such marketability of 
castings have got no bearing on the classification of the product.  Even 
otherwise the castings manufactured by the market are capable of 
being sold in the market."

	Assessee, being aggrieved, filed appeal before the appellate authority.  Appellate authority 
in its order dated 20th February, 2001 reiterated the finding recorded by the adjudicating 
authority and held that:

"I also observe that the appellants in para 3.1 of their grounds of 
appeal have stated that these castings were sold to the customers who 
placed orders for the same and not in the open market. Even where the 
goods are manufactured as per the specifications and the requirements 
of a customer, the same satisfy the criteria of the marketability."

	The Tribunal has not recorded any finding regarding marketability of the intermediary 
product i.e. C.I.castings.  Counsel appearing for the assessee very fairly concedes that if the 
intermediary product is marketable, then the excise duty would be payable because the final 
product i.e. C.I.Chilled Rolls is 

CIVIL APPEAL NO.2155 OF 2002
			-3-
exempted from payment of excise duty. Since, there is no finding recorded by the Tribunal 
regarding marketability, excise duty could not be levied on the intermediary product i.e. 
C.I.castings.  Counsel for the assessee relied upon a number of judgments to contend that 
unless the intermediary product is marketable, excise duty could not be levied. (cases referred: 
Union Carbide India Ltd. vs. Union of India &amp; Others reported in (1986) 2 SCC 547; Gujarat 
Narmada Valley Fertilizer Co. Ltd. vs. Collector of Excise &amp; Customs reported in (2005) 7 SCC 
94).
	In the absence of any finding recorded by the Tribunal regarding marketability, we are 
handicapped and cannot proceed with the case any further.  Accordingly, we accept this 
appeal; set aside the impugned order of the Tribunal and remit the case to the Tribunal for 
passing a fresh order in accordance with law including the point regarding marketability of 
the intermediary product i.e. C.I.castings.  All contentions are left open.

