
Supreme Court of India
Dharam Deo Sharma vs State Of U.P. &amp; Ors on 26 June, 2008Author: .....................J.
Bench: R.V. Raveendran, P. Sathasivam
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1111 OF 2003


DHARAM DEO SHARMA                            Appellant (s)

          VERSUS

  STATE OF U.P. &amp; ORS.                      Respondent(s)


                                       ORDER

           When the appellant was serving as Superintending Engineer in U.P.

  Electricity Board, one Vimla Devi filed a complaint on 2.2.1998, alleging that she had

  been engaged by the appellant as a maid servant a few days earlier, that on 1.2.1998,

  the appellant gave her some tablet which made her unconscious and when she

  regained consciousness she found that she had no clothes and that she was raped

  when she was unconscious. The police investigated and filed a report stating that no

  offence, as alleged, has been made out. The said Vimla Devi filed a protest petition.

  After hearing the protest petition, learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Saharanpur

  made an order on 31.8.1998 summoning the petitioner to face the charges. The

  appellant made an application for recalling the said order. The same was rejected by

  order dated 11.7.2000. The appellant filed a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C.

  before the Allahabad High Court challenging the orders dated 31.8.1998 and

                                                                                 .......2.
                                          -2-



11.7.2000. The High Court dismissed the petition by order dated 21.8.2000 holding

that the petition was premature and the appellant could raise all contentions at the

appropriate stage. The said order is challenged in this appeal filed by special leave.



2.       Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that a false case has been set up

against the appellant on account of the strict action taken by him against defaulting

electricity consumers. He also submitted that the police had found that he had not

committed the offence and his contentions were not considered by the learned

Magistrate while ordering summons.


3.       We find that the High Court found that it could not interfere with the

summoning order, in view of the specific averment in the complaint. We also find

that the High Court has safeguarded the interest of the appellant with the following

observation:-

                            "However, considering the fact that the
                  applicant has been summoned on the basis of the
                  protest petition and he being Chief Engineer in the
                  Electricity Department, is not likely to abscond, it is
                  provided that in case the applicant surrenders and
                  apply for

                                                                                    ......3.
                                            -3-
                  bail in the aforesaid case, then his application shall be
                  considered and disposed of by the courts below
                  expeditiously in accordance with law preferable on the
                  day."

We are told that subsequently the appellant has retired from service as Chief

Engineer of the Electricity Board.


4.       In the circumstance, we find no ground to interfere with the order.

Therefore, we dispose of this appeal reiterating the observation that if the appellant

surrenders and applies for bail, his application shall be considered and disposed of by

the learned Magistrate on the same day having regard to the peculiar facts of the case.




                                                                     .....................J.
                                                           (R.V. RAVEENDRAN)



                                                                         .....................J.
                                                  (P. SATHASIVAM)
NEW DELHI;
JUNE 26, 2008.

