
Supreme Court of India
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs Union Of India &amp; Ors on 10 April, 2008Author: K B I.
Bench: Cji K.G. Balakrishnan
           CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  265 of 2006

PETITIONER:
ASHOKA KUMAR THAKUR

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/04/2008

BENCH:
CJI K.G. BALAKRISHNAN

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
REPORTABLE

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 265 OF 2006
WITH
Writ Petition (C) No. 269/2006
Writ Petition (C) No. 598/2006
Writ Petition (C) No. 29/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 35/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 53/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 336/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 313/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 335/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 231/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 425/2007
Writ Petition (C) No. 428/2007 
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 112/2007 in 
Writ Petition (C) No. 265/2006

K.G. BALAKRISHNAN, C.J.I.

1.	Reservation for admission in educational  institutions or for public 
employment has been a matter of challenge in various litigations in 
this Court as well as in the High Courts.  Diverse opinions have 
been expressed in regard to the need for reservation.  Though 
several grounds  have been raised to oppose any form of 
reservation,   few in independent India have voiced disagreement 
with the proposition that the disadvantaged sections of the 
population deserve and need "special help".  But there has been 
considerable disagreement  as to which category of disadvantaged 
sections deserve  such help, about the form this help ought to take 
and about the efficacy and propriety of what the government has 
done in this regard.  

2.	Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who presided over the Congress Expert 
Committee emphasized before the Constituent Assembly that the 
removal of socio-economic inequalities was the highest priority. He 
believed that only this could make India a casteless and classless 
society, without which the Constitution will become useless and 
purposeless . The Founding Fathers of the Constitution were thus 
aware of the ripples of inequality present in society, decried the 
notion of caste and ensured that the Constitutional framework 
contained adequate safeguards that would ensure the upliftment of 
the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens, thus 
creating a society of equals. The interpretation of the term "socially 
and educationally backward", and its constituent classes, was left 
for future generations to decide.

3.	Regarding equality, Dr. Ambedkar stated in the Constituent 
Assembly  : 

"We must begin by acknowledging the fact that 
there is complete absence of two things in Indian 
Society. One of these is equality. On the social 
plane, we have in India a society based on the 
principle of graded inequality which means elevation 
for some and degradation for others. On the 
economic plane, we have a society in which there 
are some who have immense wealth as against 
many who live in abject poverty." 

4.	Judge Lauterpacht of the International Court of Justice, writing in 
1945, described the importance of the principle of equality in the 
following words:-

 "The claim to equality before the law is in substantial 
sense the most fundamental of the rights of man. It 
occupies the first place in most written constitutions. It 
is the starting point of all other liberties." 

5.	 Equality has also been enshrined in various international 
instruments, such as the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. Its Preamble speaks of  "the equal and inalienable rights of 
all members of the human family", and of  "the equal rights of men 
and women." 

6.	Reservation  is one of the many tools that are used to preserve 
and promote the essence of equality, so that disadvantaged 
groups can be brought to the forefront of civil life.  It is also the 
duty of the State to promote positive measures to remove barriers 
of inequality and enable diverse communities to  enjoy the 
freedoms and share the benefits  guaranteed by the Constitution. 
In the context of education, any measure that promotes the 
sharing of knowledge, information and ideas, and  encourages and 
improves learning,  among India's vastly diverse classes deserves 
encouragement. To cope with the modern world and its 
complexities and turbulent problems, education is a must and it  
cannot remain cloistered for the benefit of a privileged few.   
Reservations provide that extra advantage to those persons who, 
without  such support,  can  forever only dream of university, 
education, without ever being  able to realize it. This advantage is 
necessary. In the words of President Lyndon Johnson, 

"You do not take a person who, for years, has been 
hobbled by chains and liberate him, bring him up to 
the starting line and then say, 'You are free to 
compete with all the others..."  

7.	Dr. Rajendra Prasad, at the concluding address of  the Constituent  
Assembly, stated in the following words:- 

"To all we give the assurance that it will be our 
endeavour to end poverty and squalor and its 
companions, hunger and disease; to abolish 
distinction and exploitation and to ensure decent 
conditions of living.  We are embarking on a great 
task. We hope that in this we shall have the 
unstinted service and co-operation of all our people 
and the sympathy and support of all the 
communities..."  

8.	It must also be borne in mind that many other democracies face 
similar problems and grapple with issues of discrimination, in their 
own societal context. Though their social structure may be 
markedly different from ours, the problem of inequality in the larger 
context and the tools used to combat it may be common. As stated 
by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg at the 51st Cardozo Memorial 
Lecture, in 1999 :

"In my view, comparative analysis emphatically is 
relevant to the task of interpreting constitutions and 
enforcing human rights. We are losers if we neglect 
what others can tell us about endeavours to 
eradicate bias against women, minorities and other 
disadvantaged groups. For irrational prejudice and 
rank discrimination are infectious in our world. In 
this, reality, as well as the determination to counter 
it, we all share."

9.	 We are conscious of the fact that any reservation or preference 
shall not lead to reverse discrimination.   The Constitution (Ninety-
Third) Amendment Act, 2005 and the enactment of Act  5 of 2007  
giving reservation to Other Backward Classes (OBCs), Scheduled 
Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs) created mixed reactions 
in the society.   Though the reservation in favour of SC and ST is 
not opposed by the petitioners,  the reservation of 27% in favour of 
Other Backward Classes/Socially and educationally backward 
classes   is strongly opposed by various petitioners in these cases.    
Eminent Counsel appeared both for the petitioners and 
respondents.  The learned Solicitor General and Additional 
Solicitor General appeared and expressed their views.   We have 
tried to address, with utmost care and attention, the various 
arguments advanced by the learned counsel and we are greatly 
beholden to all of them for the manner in which they have 
analysed and presented the case before us which is of great 
importance, affecting large sections of the community. 

10.	By The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005,  
clause (5)  was inserted in Article 15 of the Constitution which 
reads as under :-

"Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause 
(1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making 
any special provision, by law, for the advancement of 
any socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the 
Scheduled Tribes in so far as such special provisions 
relate to their admission to the educational 
institutions including private educational institutions, 
whether aided or unaided by the State, other than 
the minority educational institutions referred to in 
clause (1) of article 30."

11.	In  Unni Krishnan, J.P. &amp; Ors.  Vs.   State of Andhra 
Pradesh &amp; Ors. , it was held that right to establish educational 
institutions can neither be a trade or business nor can it be a 
profession within the meaning of Article 19(1)(g).  This was 
overruled in T.M.A. Pai Foundation &amp; Ors.   Vs. State of 
Karnataka &amp; Ors. , wherein it was held that all citizens have the 
fundamental right to establish and administer educational 
institutions  under Article 19(1)(g) and the term "occupation"  in 
Article 19(1)(g) comprehends the establishment and running of 
educational institutions and State regulation of admissions in such 
institutions would not be regarded as an unreasonable restriction 
on that fundamental right to carry on business under Article 19(6) 
of the Constitution.   Education is primarily the responsibility of the 
State Governments.  The Union Government also has certain 
responsibility specified in the Constitution on matters relating to 
institutions of national importance and certain other specified 
institutions of higher education and promotion of educational 
opportunities for the weaker sections of society. The Parliament 
introduced Article 15(5) by The Constitution (Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2005 to enable the State to make such provision 
for the advancement of SC, ST and Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes (SEBC) of citizens in relation to a specific 
subject, namely, admission to educational institutions including 
private educational institutions whether aided or unaided by the 
State notwithstanding the provisions of Article 19(1)(g). In the 
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Constitution (Ninety-
Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 it has been stated that :-

"At present, the number of seats available in aided 
or State maintained institutions, particularly in 
respect of professional education, is limited in 
comparison to those in private unaided institutions.

To promote the educational advancement of the 
socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens, i.e., the OBCs or the Scheduled Castes ad 
Scheduled Tribes in matters of admission of 
students belonging to these categories in unaided 
educational institutions other than the minority 
educational institutions referred to Clause (1) of 
Article 30 of the Constitution, it is proposed to 
amplify Article 15.  The  new Clause (5) shall enable 
the Parliament as well as the State Legislatures to 
make appropriate laws for the purposes mentioned 
above."

12.	After the above Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 
2005, the Parliament passed The Central Educational Institutions 
(Reservation in Admission) Act, 2006 (No. 5 of 2007) (hereinafter 
referred to as "the Act 5 of 2007").  

13.	Section 3 of Act 5 of 2007 provides for reservation of 15% 
seats for Scheduled Castes,  7=% seats for Scheduled Tribes and 
27% for Other Backward Classes in Central Educational 
Institutions. The said section is extracted below : - 

"3.	The reservation of seats in admission and its 
extent in a Central Educational Institution shall be 
provided in the following manner, namely:-

(i)	out of the annual permitted strength in each 
branch of study or faculty, fifteen per cent seats 
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes;
(ii)	out of the annual permitted strength in each 
branch of study or faculty, seven and one-half per 
cent seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled 
Tribes;
(iii)	out of the annual permitted strength in each 
branch of study or faculty, twenty-seven per cent 
seats shall be reserved for the Other Backward 
Classes."

14.	"Central Educational Institution" has been defined under 
Section 2(d) of the Act as follows:

	2(d)	"Central Educational Institution" means 
	
(i)	a university established or incorporated by 
or under a Central Act;
(ii)	an institution of national importance set up 
by an Act of Parliament;
(iii)	an institution, declared as a deemed 
University under section 3 of the University 
Grants Commission Act, 1956, and 
maintained by or receiving aid from the 
Central Government;
(iv)	an institution maintained by or receiving aid 
from the Central Government, whether 
directly or indirectly, and affiliated to an 
institution referred to in clause (i) or clause 
(ii), or a constituent unit of an institution, 
referred to in clause (iii);
(v)	an educational institution set up by the 
Central Government under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860.

15.	The percentage of reservation to various groups such as 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes are with reference to the annual permitted strength of the 
Central Educational Institutions and the "annual permitted 
strength" is defined under Section2(b) of the Act as follows:-

2(b)	"annual permitted strength" means the number of 
seats, in a course or programme for teaching or 
instruction in each branch of study or faculty authorized 
by an appropriate authority for admission of students to 
a Central Educational Institution



16.	Section 4 of the Act specifically says that the provisions of 
Section 3 shall apply to certain institutions. Section 4 reads as 
under:-

4.	The provisions of Section 3 of this Act shall not 
apply to 

(a)	a Central Educational Institution established in 
the tribal areas referred to in the Sixth Schedule 
to the Constitution;
(b)	the institutions of excellence, research 
institutions, institutions of national and strategic 
importance specified in the Schedule to this Act;

Provided that the Central Government may, as and 
when considered necessary, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, amend the Schedule;

(c)	a Minority Educational Institution as defined in 
this Act;
(d)	a course or programme at high levels of 
specialization, including at the post-doctoral level, 
within any branch or study or faculty, which the 
Central Government may, in consultation with the 
appropriate authority, specify."

17.	"Minority Educational Institution" is defined in Section 2(f) of 
the Act as follows:-

"Minority Educational Institution" means an institution 
established and administered by the minorities under 
clause (1) of article 30 of the Constitution and so 
declared by an Act of Parliament or by the Central 
Government or declared as a Minority Educational 
Institution under the National Commission for Minority 
Educational Institutions Act, 2004"

18.	Section 2(g) defines "Other Backward Classes" as under:-

"Other Backward Classes" means the class or classes 
of citizens who are socially and educationally 
backward, and are so determined by the Central 
Government"

19.	Clause 2(h) defines "Scheduled Castes" and clause 2(i) 
defines "Scheduled Tribes"  as under:

"Scheduled Castes" means the Scheduled Castes 
notified under article 341 of the Constitution;

"Scheduled Tribes" means the Scheduled Tribes 
notified under article 342 of the Constitution.

20.	Section 5 of the Act mandates the increase of seats in the 
Central Educational Institutions by providing reservation to 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward 
Classes. Section 5 reads as follows:-

"5.(1)	Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (iii) 
of section 3 and in any other law for the time being in 
force, every Central Educational Institution shall, with 
the prior approval of the appropriate authority, increase 
the number of seats in a branch of study or faculty over 
and above its annual permitted strength so that the 
number of seats, excluding those reserved for the 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes, is 
not less than the number of such seats available for the 
academic session immediately preceding the date of 
the coming into force of this Act.

(2)	Where, on a representation by any Central 
Educational Institution, the Central Government, in 
consultation with the appropriate authority, is satisfied 
that for reasons of financial, physical or academic 
limitations or in order to maintain the standards of 
education, the annual permitted strength in any branch 
of study or faculty of such institution cannot be 
increased for the academic session following the 
commencement of this Act, it may permit by notification 
in the Official Gazette, such institution to increase the 
annual permitted strength over a maximum period of 
three years beginning with the academic session 
following the commencement of this Act; and then, the 
extent of reservation for the Other Backward Classes 
as provided in clause (iii) of section 3 shall be limited 
for that academic session in such manner that the 
number of seats available to the Other Backward 
Classes for each academic session are commensurate 
with the increase in the permitted strength for each 
year."

21.	 By virtue of definition of the "Central Educational Institutions" 
under clause (d)(iv) of Section 2 of the Act, all institutions 
maintained by or receiving aid from the Central Government 
whether directly or indirectly, and affiliated to any university or 
deemed university or institution of national importance, in addition 
to universities which are established or incorporated under a 
Central Act, institutions of national importance set up by Acts of 
Parliament, deemed universities maintained or receiving aid from 
Central Government  and institutions set up by the Central 
Government with the Societies Registration Act, 1960, are brought 
under the purview of reservation under Section 3 of the Act.  The 
object of the Act is to introduce in reservation in only such 
institutions which are defined as "Central Educational Institutions" 
and not any other private unaided institutions. 

22.	The Statement of Objects and Reasons for the Act gives the 
object of the Act thus :-

"Greater access to higher education including 
professional education, to a large number of students 
belonging to the socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes, has been a matter of major concern.  
The reservation of seats for the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes of 
citizens (OBCs) in admission to educational institutions 
is derived from the provisions of clause (4) of article 15.  
At present, the number of seats available in aided or 
State maintained institutions, particularly in respect of 
professional education, is limited in comparison to 
those in private unaided institutions.

2.	It is laid down in article 46, as a directive principle 
of State policy, that the State shall promote with special 
care the educational and economic interests of the 
weaker sections of the people and protect them from 
social injustice.  Access to education is important in 
order to ensure advancement of persons belonging to 
the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the 
socially and educationally backward classes also 
referred to as the OBCs.

3.	Clause (1) of article 30 provides the right to all 
minorities to establish and administer educational 
institutions of their choice.  It is essential that the rights 
available to minorities are protected in regard to 
institutions established and administered by them.  
Accordingly, institutions declared by the State to be 
minority institutions under clause (1) of article 30 are 
omitted from the operation of the proposal.

4.	To promote the educational advancement of the 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens 
i.e. the OBCs or of the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes in matters of admission of students 
belonging to these categories in unaided educational 
institutions, other than the minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30 of the 
Constitution, it is proposed to amplify article 15.  The 
new clause (5) shall enable the Parliament as well as 
the State Legislatures to make appropriate laws for the 
purposes mentioned above.

5.	The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects."

23.	The Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005, by 
which Article 15(5) was inserted in the Constitution, is challenged  
in these petitions, on various grounds.  In some of the writ petitions 
which have been filed after the passing of Act 5 of 2007,  the 
challenge is directed against the various provisions of the Act 5 of 
2007.  Initially, these writ petitions were heard by a Bench of two 
Judges. Considering the constitutional importance of these 
questions, all these writ petitions were referred to a Constitution 
Bench.

24.	We have heard learned Counsel appearing for the various 
petitioners.  The learned Senior Counsel, Shri Harish Salve,       
Shri F.S. Nariman, Shri K.K. Venugopal, Shri P.P. Rao and                       
Dr. Rajeev Dhavan and learned Counsel Shri Sushil Kumar Jain 
addressed the main arguments on behalf of the petitioners.  Shri 
Ashok Kumar Thakur appeared in person.  Supporting the 
Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 and the 
provisions of the said Act, learned Senior Counsel Shri K. 
Parasaran, appearing for the Union of India, learned Solicitor 
General Shri G.E. Vahanvati and learned Additional Solicitor 
General Shri Gopal Subramanium submitted arguments. We have 
also heard learned Senior Counsel Shri Ram Jethmalani, Shri T.R. 
Andhyarujina, Ms. Indra Jaisingh, Shri Rakesh Dwivedi and           
Shri Ravivarma Kumar.  We also had the advantage of the written 
submissions made by these Counsel.

25.	The arguments advanced against the Constitution (Ninety-
Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 and Act 5 of 2007 can be 
summarized as follows.

26.	It was contended by Shri Harish Salve, learned Senior 
Counsel, who confined his arguments to the constitutionality of the 
provisions of the Act, especially sub-clause (3) of Section 3 of the 
Act which deals with the reservation to the extent of 27% of the 
total number of seats for the "socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens".    According to him,  the admission to 
educational institutions should be based purely on merit and to 
allow the State to prefer a student with lesser merit over those who 
would have otherwise got admission,  is ex facie discriminatory.  It 
is submitted that all  obviously discriminatory laws are violative of 
the rule of equality and it is for the State to maintain the principles 
of equality and to establish the need for such laws as well as their 
validity. It was further argued that Article 15(5) does not protect the 
validity of the Act and that the provision in the Act for preferential 
admission solely on the basis of caste would violate Article 29(2) of 
the Constitution, as has been laid down in The State of Madras   
Vs.  Srimathi Champakam Dorairajan .  It was also argued that 
Article 15(5) could be construed as an exception to Article 15(1) 
and affirmative action, if excessive, is bound to result in reverse 
discrimination which is not permissible.   According to the learned 
Senior Counsel, this is not a genuine social engineering measure 
but vote bank politics and would create permanent fissures in 
society.  It was  argued that the provisions of the Act are facially 
violative of Article 14 and it could only be justified on the basis of 
compelling State necessity. A greater degree of  compulsion is 
necessary to establish a compelling State necessity than what is 
ordinarily required to be shown in the case of economic legislation.  
The learned Senior Counsel dealt in detail with the argument that 
the backward classes cannot be defined solely on the basis of 
caste and reference was made to various decisions of this Court.  
The learned Senior Counsel particularly referred to various 
decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States and 
contended that this kind of legislation, that is, the impugned Act, 
attempting affirmative action is to be treated as "suspect 
legislation" and it has to undergo the tests of "strict scrutiny" and 
"compelling state necessity".   Finally, the learned Counsel argued 
that non-exclusion of creamy layer is per se illegal and contrary to 
what has been laid down by this Court in Indra Sawhney   Vs.  
Union of India &amp; Ors. .

27.	The validity of Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 
2005 was seriously challenged by arguing that the amendment is 
destructive of basic structure of the Constitution.  The learned 
Counsel was of the view that both the Act as well as the 
Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 have to be 
declared ultra vires  the Constitution.

28.		Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
the petitioners in Writ Petition No. 53/2007 contended that the 
affirmative action scheme under Article 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) has 
to comply with the mandate of Article 14, 15(1) and 16(1) of the 
Constitution.  It was argued that these are only enabling provisions 
and not part of the fundamental rights.  "Notwithstanding", as used 
in Article 15(3), 15(4) and 15(5) cannot be construed as 
"notwithstanding the declaration of equality principle".  In view of 
the decision of this Court in Champakam Dorairajan (supra) 
admission quotas are impermissible on any ground based solely 
on religion, race, caste or any one of them.   It was argued that 
there is a lack of criteria for identification of Other Backward 
Classes (OBCs) and Socially and Educationally Backward Classes 
(SEBCs).   The concept of creamy layer is applicable to Article 15 
and Article 16 and non-exclusion of creamy layer in the Act is 
illegal.  Further it was argued that quota should not be a 
punishment for unreserved categories and there should not be any 
reverse discrimination.   The learned Senior Counsel further 
challenged the constitutional validity of Constitution (Ninety-Third  
Amendment) Act, 2005 and contended that it is against the basic 
structure of the Constitution.  The procedure laid down under 
Article 368 has not been followed.  It was contended that the 
proviso to Article 368 of the Constitution requires ratification of the 
Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 by one half of 
the States. The amendment seeks to nationalize the private 
educational institutions which is unreasonable and impermissible 
and reference was made in this regard to T.M.A. Pai Foundation 
(supra).  It was argued that Act 5 of 2007 is unreasonable, 
arbitrary, capricious and contrary to Articles 14 and 21 of the 
Constitution.  He elaborated his arguments on the basis of the 
tests laid down in the M. Nagaraj &amp; Ors.   Vs.  Union of India &amp; 
Ors.  and  I.R. Coelho (Dead) by LRS.   Vs. State of T.N.  
cases and lastly, submitted that both Act 5 of 2007 and The 
Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005 are liable to be 
declared as ultra vires the Constitution.

29.		Dr. Rajeev Dhavan elaborately argued that perusal of the 
history of the reservations from 1880 to 2007 for OBCs and 
SEBCs showed that there was no emphasis on communities by 
the British regime and community based criteria was held to be 
illegal in Champakam Dorairajan (supra).  From 1950 to 1970, 
there was no proper inquiry for ascertaining the OBCs or SEBCs. 
The learned Counsel emphasized that in Indra Sawhney's  case 
(supra), caste was excluded as a criteria and the identification of 
SEBCs or OBCs based on caste could not operate for both Articles 
15(4) and 16(4).  According to the learned Senior Counsel, the 
criteria for identifying SEBCs should be based on the atrocities 
inflicted on that class, discriminatory patterns followed against that 
class, disadvantage suffered by that class and disempowerment in 
respect of the power of the State and political non-representation.  
The class should also be relatively homogeneous in nature.

30.	According to the learned Senior Counsel, there is a lack of 
criteria for fixing SEBCs or OBCs and this case is being taken to 
excite vote-banks.  It was argued that the 27% of reservation 
under the Act of 2007 was based on criteria which did not exist.  It 
was contended that the creamy layer principle is applicable to 
OBCs and also to SCs and STs.  It was argued that historic 
discrimination is not a valid criteria for determining the 
beneficiaries of affirmative action and the correct approach is to 
look at the continuing wrong and not past discrimination and that 
the quotas should not be a punishment for the non-reserved 
category resulting in reverse discrimination.  The learned Senior 
Counsel contended that the Ninety-Third Amendment is against 
the basic structure of the Constitution.  It was argued that the 
Doctrine of Equality is adversely affected by giving a wide and 
untrammeled enabling power to the Union Legislature that may 
affect the rights of the non-OBCs, SCs and STs.  It was argued 
that the balance between what was referred to as the "Golden 
Triangle" in   Minerva Mills Ltd. &amp; Ors.   Vs.  Union of India &amp; 
Ors.  has been totally nullified by the Ninety-Third Amendment.  It 
was argued that the legislative declarations of facts are not beyond 
judicial scrutiny and the court can tear the veil to decide the real 
nature of the statute and decide the constitutional validity.  It was 
argued that the Act 5 of 2007 is subject to judicial review on the 
ground that its unreasonable and clear criteria have not been laid 
down to identify OBCs and there was no compelling necessity 
other than political patronage.

31.		Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Senior Counsel appearing in 
W.P. (Civil) No. 598 of 2006 contended that Articles 15(4) and 
15(5) are mutually exclusive with the former concerning 
admissions to aided institutions and the latter concerning 
admissions to unaided institutions.  Article 15(5)  expressly used 
the phrase "whether aided or unaided", making it clear that it is not 
merely restricting itself to unaided institutions.  Therefore, it is 
argued that from the very inception of the Constitution, Article 
15(4) was a provision and was the source of legislative power for 
the purpose of making reservation for the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes as well as the Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes of citizens in aided minority educational 
institutions. On the other hand, Article 15(5), which provides 
reservation of seats for SCs and STs as well as SEBCs in aided 
educational institutions expressly excludes such reservation being 
made at all in minority educational institutions covered by Article 
30(1) of the Constitution. According to him,  it would take away the 
valuable rights of OBCs, SCs and STs given by the State under 
Article 15(4) of the Constitution and this would result in annulling 
the endeavour of the founding fathers of the Constitution and 
would result in exclusion of SCs and STs from the mainstream of 
the society and stall their development for centuries to come. 
According to the learned Counsel for the petitioners, the argument 
of the Union of India that Article 15(4) and 15(5) are both enabling 
provisions and both will stand together and both can be complied 
with is incorrect. It was argued that Article 15(4) operates with a 
qualification that nothing in Article 15 or in Article 29(2) of the 
Constitution shall prevent the State from making special provision 
for SCs and STs as well as SEBCs while Article 15(5) operates 
with a qualification that  "nothing in Article 15 or Article 19(1)(g)"  
shall prevent the State from making such special provisions for 
SCs and STs as well as SEBCs.  The qualifying words in Article 
15(4) do not have any real meaning or effect for the reason that 
both Article 15(1) as well as Article 29(2) prohibit discrimination on 
grounds only of religion and/or for caste.  Therefore, it is argued 
that there is a direct conflict between Article 15(4) and 15(5). As 
both Articles contain an exclusionary clause excluding the 
operation of the rest of Article 15.  It was contended that The 
Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005 is violative of the 
basic structure as it breaches the central character of the 
Constitution by placing the minority educational institutions based 
on religion on a special footing and exempting it from bearing the 
common burden of reservation for SCs, STs and SEBCs.  It was 
argued that such exclusion of minority institution is not severable 
from Article 15(5).  As regards the validity of the Act 5 of 2007, it 
failed to exclude the "creamy layer" from the caste which would 
render the identification of the "caste" as "backward class" which is 
unconstitutional and void.  Their inclusion would result in unequals 
being treated as equals and result in giving the benefit of 
reservation to the advanced sections in that caste.  The 
consequences would be that the inclusion of the caste for the 
benefit of reservations would be purely on the basis of caste only 
thus violating Article 15(1) and Article 29(2) of the Constitution.  
The doctrine of severability does not apply and therefore, the Act 5 
of 2007 is unconstitutional and void to the extent that it does not 
provide exclusion of 'creamy layer' from the SEBCs.  Therefore, it 
was prayed that both The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) 
Amendment Act, 2005 as well as the Act 5 of 2007 be struck down 
as unconstitutional.

32.		Shri F.S. Nariman, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 
petitioners in W.P. (Civil) No. 35 of 2007, contended that the caste 
cannot be the sole criteria for determining the socially and 
educationally backward classes under Article 15(4) and 15(5)  of 
the Constitution and the test for Article 15(5) has to be "occupation 
cum income" where caste may or may not be one of the many 
considerations having a nebulous weightage, and alternatively 
without conceding if caste at all is taken as one of the many 
considerations then it can only be those castes which satisfy the 
test of similarity with Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.  It was 
argued that the decision of this Court in  R. Chitralekha &amp; Anr.  
Vs.   State of Mysore &amp; Ors.   still occupies the field for the 
purpose of Article 15 and the decision in  R. Chitralekha's  case 
(supra) was affirmed by the Bench in  Indra Sawhney's case 
(supra).  It was argued that OBCs are already educationally 
forward and no reservation in higher education is justified.  The 
learned Senior Counsel relied on the literacy rate by age groups as 
quoted in the Sachar Committee Report.  It was contended that in 
data given in the judgment in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), 
OBCs were not taken as educationally backward.  According to the  
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners, there can only be 
presumption of forwardness of OBCs and they are not backward.  
The burden is on the Government to provide that the intended 
beneficiaries are really backward citizens. The OBCs have not 
suffered social inequalities or oppression that had been inflicted on 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes by the society and, 
according to the learned Senior Counsel, the caste-occupation 
nexus barely survives today and is a misleading guide.  The caste 
based occupation association has been rapidly disappearing from 
the Indian society.  For Articles 15(4) and 15(5), economic 
consideration has to be the dominant criterion.  The non-exclusion 
of "creamy layer" is illegal and it was intended to safeguard the 
really deprived and backward people among the so-called OBCs.  
It was contended that the Government has not published the list of 
OBCs for Article 15(5) and the Union of India has not been able to 
produce the list or the criteria for determining the SEBCs.  No time 
frame has been fixed for such reservation.  Therefore, the Act 5 of 
2007 is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and is 
thus unconstitutional.

33.		Appearing for the Writ Petitioner in W.P. (Civil) No. 231/2007 
filed by the Citizens for Equality, the learned Senior Counsel      
Shri P.P. Rao contended that the mandate of Article 45 to provide 
free and compulsory education for all children until they complete 
the age of 14 years has not been complied with by the 
Government and therefore, there is clear violation of Article 20 of 
the Constitution.  Although the Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan  (SSA) 
Project was introduced with certain objectives, these objectives 
were not fulfilled.  The Constitution seeks to achieve a casteless 
and classless society.  Therefore, identification of socially and 
educationally backward classes should be based on such criteria 
which facilitate the eradication of the caste system.  The 
educational backwardness of the backward classes and the 
SEBCs should be removed and once this educational 
backwardness is removed, clause 4 and 5 of Article 15 will 
become redundant and unnecessary.  It was argued that without 
ensuring that every child belonging to a backward class is provided 
free and compulsory education upto 10+2 level any reservation 
provided in higher education is discriminatory inter se between 
members of the backward classes themselves and  violative of 
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.  Education upto secondary 
school level should be the measure for determining educational 
backwardness.  The social and educational backwardness referred 
to in Article 15(4) requires separate identification of SEBCs.  
Agricultural labourers, rickshaw pullers/drivers, street hawkers etc. 
may well qualify for being designated as "backward classes"  
According to petitioner's learned Senior Counsel, a rational basis 
would be to identify backward classes through occupations 
traditionally considered to be inferior, yielding low income.  It was 
argued that in any event, the "creamy layer" among the socially 
and educationally backward classes is liable to be excluded.

34.	  	Shri Sushil Kumar Jain, learned Counsel appearing in W.P. 
(Civil) No. 598 of 2006, elaborately argued the issues involved in 
this case.  The main contention of the petitioner's Counsel is that 
the "affirmative action" policy of the Government of India is 
discriminatory and against general public interest.  The policy is 
intended to "uplift" the so called socially and educationally 
backward sections of the society by the process of positive 
discrimination.  It was argued that the Ninety-Third Constitutional 
Amendment is destructive of the basic structure of the Constitution 
as it destroys the delicate balance of the various fundamental 
rights that the citizens of the country enjoy.  The provision of 
Article 15(5) was inserted as a proviso to Article 19(6) which has 
been held to be unreasonable and against the constitutional 
scheme.  Article 15(5) makes an exception for the minority 
institutions covered under Article 30 and therefore treats them 
differently from other private institutions.  The Central Education 
Institution (Reservation in Admission) Act, 2007 which has been 
enacted in purported exercise of the said powers, is in excess of 
the said powers.  Since the target beneficiaries of Article 15(5) 
have not been identified with a necessary degree of specificity, the 
Act 5 of 2007 is illegal. There ought to be a quantitative correlation 
between the benefits conferred and the extent of the "problem" 
sought to be remedied, the correlation being "reasonable" and not 
"proportionate".  The Act 5 of 2007 does not provide the manner or 
the principles on which the identification of OBC is to be made.  
Therefore, it lacks the necessary nexus with the ultimate objects 
sought to be achieved. The reservation of seats for the 
"beneficiaries" for many years to come without any provision for 
review gives rigidity and permanency to such measures. This 
would result in excessive reservation and thereby cause reverse 
discrimination.  The 100% quota in the additional seats that will be 
created in the educational institutions is facially discriminatory.  
Identification of SEBCs on the basis of caste creates vested 
interest in backwardness.  Therefore, the measures and means 
chosen by the Government are therefore unethical to the 
constitutional goals.  Failure to exclude "creamy layer" allows 
conferment of benefits on undeserving persons.  The action of the 
State Governments lacks in the basic details of the extent of the 
measure.  The exact social malaise sought to be remedied is not 
clear.

35.		The learned Counsel for the petitioner further contended that 
the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment violates the basic 
structure of the Constitution.  This Court clarified the rights of the 
private educational institutions in terms of Article 19(1)(g) of the 
Constitution in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case (supra) as explained 
in P.A. Inamdar &amp; Ors.  Vs. State of Maharashtra &amp; Ors.          
It was held in that case that fixation of quotas and reservation of 
seats in private educational institutions amounts to "Nationalization 
of Education". The Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment is thus 
an unreasonable action of the legislature.  It was argued that the 
impugned amendment alters supremacy of the Constitution and 
there was only limited constituent power to amend Article 368.
Article 15(5) would enable the State to make the law to provide 
reservation to private educational institution which has been held 
to be an unreasonable encroachment on the fundamental rights 
and this amendment would alter the balance between Part III and 
IV of the Constitution.  Reliance was placed on various decisions 
by the petitioner's learned Counsel.  The impugned amendment 
specifically excludes the application of Article 19(1)(g),  whereas 
the institutions governed by Article 26 and the minority institutions 
governed by Article 30(1) have been left out. This, according to the 
petitioner's Counsel, is discriminatory and illegal and that there 
was no justification to this differential treatment. The petitioner's 
learned Counsel also challenged the quantum of reservations 
provided under the Act 5 of 2007.  Any determination of the extent 
of reservation without considering the future impact of the 
reservation would be unjust, arbitrary and unreasonable.  Caste 
based reservation would not be in the larger interest of the national 
unity and integrity.  The benefits could be given only to those 
communities which are not adequately represented and not to 
those which are socially and educationally advanced.  Reservation 
in the form of quota is illegal and if some classes are to be given 
some benefit and to be equalized with the general category they 
could be awarded some additional marks like it is being given to 
the women candidates seeking admission in colleges.  Many of the 
castes included in SEBCs are not really backward classes and 
some of them were even rulers of erstwhile States for a number of 
years.  The benefits and privileges which are given to SCs/STs 
should not be extended to OBCs.  The members of the OBC 
communities are capable of competing with the general category 
candidates and the increase in seats would entail a corresponding 
increase in infrastructure, and it is submitted that an increase in 
infrastructure would, therefore, to be financed through tax 
collections and, therefore, every member of the public (including 
the general category) is entitled to be considered for admission in 
the said increase.  The learned Counsel also strongly objected to 
"caste" being taken as a means of classification and identification 
of SEBCs and OBCs.  It is contended that it is in complete 
derogation of provisions of Article 15(1) and, according to the 
petitioner's learned Counsel, many of the castes which have been 
included in SEBCs are really not SEBCs and thus past historical 
discrimination is entirely irrelevant for conferment of benefits in the 
present times.  It was also contended that there are no traditional 
occupations now. It is submitted that the identification of castes as 
a "class" to justify the same as being occupations on a 
presumption that the persons belonging to a particular caste 
continue to follow a particular occupation especially in the present 
constitutional scheme which gives freedom to choose any 
business, occupation or profession is entirely fallacious.  The 
learned Counsel for the petitioner also contended that the              
non-exclusion of creamy layer is illegal and relied on Indra 
Sawhney's case (supra) and  Indra Sawhney (II)  Vs. Union of 
India &amp; Others .

36.		Shri Ashoka Kumar Thakur, who appeared in person, 
supported all the contentions raised by various learned Counsel 
and urged that the Ninety-Third Constitution Amendment as well 
as the Act 5 of 2007 are unconstitutional and they are liable to be 
struck down.    

37.	On behalf of the respondents, several Senior Counsel appeared 
and contended that the contentions of the petitioners challenging 
the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment and the Act 5 of 2007 
are without any merit and are liable to be dismissed.  The 
contentions raised by the petitioners' Counsel were refuted by the 
respondents' Counsel by raising the plea that affirmative action is 
needed for promoting educational and economic interest  of 
weaker section of society.  Shri K. Parasaran, learned Senior 
Counsel appearing for the Union of India, submitted that the 
Constitution is to be interpreted as an integral, logical whole, and 
while construing one part, regard must be had to the provisions of 
the other parts, rendering no portion as unnecessary or redundant.  
It was argued that when constitutional provisions are interpreted, it 
has to be borne in mind that the interpretation is such as to further 
the object of their incorporation and they cannot be interpreted in a 
manner that renders another provision redundant.  

38.	It was argued that the constitutional provision must not be 
construed in a narrow and constricted sense but in a wide and 
liberal manner so as to anticipate and take into account the 
changing conditions and purposes so that the constitutional 
provision does not get fossilized but remains flexible enough to 
meet the newly emerging problems and challenges of this age.  
Reference was made to various decisions rendered by this Court 
regarding the interpretations of constitutional provisions.  It was 
pointed out that when social welfare measures are sought to be 
implemented and the Constitution has to be interpreted in such 
context, it has to be kept in mind that the Preamble is the text 
which sets out the goal that is to be attained; and that Part III is the 
texture into which is woven a pattern of rights.

39.	 Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles are both 
complementary and supplementary to each other.  Preamble is a 
part of the Constitution and the edifice of our Constitution is built 
upon the concepts crystallized in the Preamble.  Reference was 
made to the observations made by Chief Justice Sikri in              
His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru   Vs.   State 
of Kerala , wherein it was argued that the Constitution should be 
read and interpreted in the light of the grand and noble vision 
expressed in the Preamble.  The Preamble secures and assures to 
all citizens justice, social, economic and political and it assures the 
equality of status and of opportunity.  Education and the economic 
well-being of an individual give a status in society.  When a large 
number of OBCs, SCs and STs get better educated and get into 
Parliament, legislative assemblies, public employment, professions 
and into other walks of public life, the attitude that they are inferior 
will disappear.  This will promote fraternity assuring the dignity of 
the individual and the unity and integrity of the nation.  The single 
most powerful tool for the upliftment and progress of such diverse 
communities is education.  

40.	The Fundamental Rights in Part III are not to be read in 
isolation. All rights conferred in Part III of the Constitution are 
subject to at least other provisions of the said Part III. The 
Directive Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution are 
equally as important as Fundamental Rights.  Part IV is made not 
enforceable by Court for the reason inter alia as to financial 
implications and priorities.  Principles of Part IV have to be 
gradually transformed into fundamental rights depending upon the 
economic capacity of the State.  Article 45 is being transformed 
into a fundamental right by 86th Amendment of the Constitution by 
inserting Article 21 A.  Clause 2 of Article 38 says that, "the State 
shall, in particular, strive to minimize the inequalities in income and 
endeavour to eliminate inequalities in status, facilities and 
opportunities, not only amongst individuals but also amongst 
groups of people residing in different areas or engaged in different 
vocations".   Under Article 46, "the State shall promote with special 
care the educational and economic interests of the weaker 
sections of the people and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social 
injustice and all forms of exploitation".   It is submitted that the 
Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment was brought into force to 
bring about economic and social regeneration of the teeming 
millions who are steeped in poverty, ignorance and social 
backwardness.  Shri K. Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel, 
contended that the concept of basic structure is not a vague 
concept and it was illustrated in the judgment in Kesavananda 
Bharati's case (supra).  It was pointed out that the supremacy of 
the Constitution, republican and democratic form of Government 
and sovereignty of the country, secular and federal character of 
the Constitution, demarcation of power between the legislature, the 
executive and the judiciary, the dignity of the individual (secured by 
the various freedoms and basic rights in Part III and the mandate 
to build a welfare State contained in Part IV), the unity and the 
integrity of the nation are some of the principles of basic structure 
of the Constitution.  It was contended that when the constitutional 
validity of a statute is considered, the cardinal rule to be followed is 
to look at the Preamble to the Constitution as the guiding light and 
the Directive Principles of State Policy as a book of interpretation.   
On a harmonious reading of the Preamble, Part III and Part IV, it is 
manifest that there is a Constitutional promise to the weaker 
sections / SEBCs and this solemn duty has to be fulfilled.

41.	It was pointed out that the observations in Champakam 
Dorairajan  (supra) that the Directive Principles are subordinate to 
the Fundamental Rights is no longer good law after the decision of 
the Kesavanda Bharati  (supra) case and other decisions of this 
Court.  It was pointed out that the de facto inequalities which exist 
in the society are to be taken into account and affirmative action by 
way of giving preference to the socially and economically 
disadvantaged persons or inflicting handicaps on those more 
advantageously placed is to be made in order to bring about real 
equality.  It is submitted that special provision for advancement of 
any socially and educationally backward citizens may be made by 
determining the socially and educationally backward classes on 
the basis of caste.  Article 15(4) neutralized the decision in 
Champakam Dorairajan's case (surpa).  It was enacted by the 
Provisional Parliament which consisted of the very same Members 
who constituted the Constituent Assembly.   Our Constitution is not 
caste blind and the Constitution prohibits discrimination based 
'only on caste' and not 'caste and something else'.

42.	In    Unni Krishnan's case (supra) it was held that Article 
19(1)(g) is not attracted for establishing and running educational 
institutions.  But this decision was overruled in T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation (supra) and it was held that establishing and running 
an educational institution is an "occupation" within the meaning of 
Article 19(1)(g).   In P.A. Inamdar's case (supra), it was held that 
the private educational institutions, including minority institutions, 
are free to  admit students of their own choice and the State by 
regulatory measures cannot control the admission.  It was held 
that the State cannot impose reservation policy to unaided 
institutions.  The above ruling disabled the State to resort to its 
enabling power under Article 15(4) of the Constitution.  It was 
argued by Shri Parasaran that the above rulings necessitated the 
enactment of The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 
2005 by inserting Article 15(5) through which enabling power was 
conferred on the Parliament and the State Legislatures, so that 
they would have the legislative competence to pass a law 
providing for reservation in educational institutions which will not 
be hit by Article 19(1)(g).  But rights of minorities under  Article  30  
are not touched by Article 15(5).

43.	In Kesavananda Bharati (supra) it was held that the 
fundamental rights may not be abrogated but they can be 
abridged.  The validity of the 24th Amendment of the Constitution 
abridging the fundamental rights was upheld by the Court.  The 
right under Article 19(1)(f) has been completely abrogated by the 
44th Amendment of the Constitution which is permissible for the 
constituent power to abridge the Fundamental Rights especially for 
reaching the goal of the Preamble of the Constitution.  It is an 
instance of transforming the principles of Part IV into Part III 
whereby it becomes enforceable.   All rights conferred in Part III of 
the Constitution are subject to other provisions in the same Part.  
Article 15(4) introduced by the 1st Amendment to the Constitution 
is a similar instance of abridging of Fundamental Rights of the 
general category of citizens to ensure the Fundamental Rights of 
OBCs, SCs and STs.  Article 15(5) is a similar provision and is well 
within the Constituent power of amendment.  Article 15(5) is an 
enabling provision and vests power in the Parliament and the State 
legislatures.  

44.	There is vital distinction between the vesting of a power and the 
exercise of power and the manner of its exercise.  It would only 
enable the Parliament and the State legislatures to make special 
provisions by law for enforcement of any socially and educationally 
backward class of citizens or for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes relating to their admission to educational institutions 
including private educational institutions.  

45.	As regards exemption of minority educational institutions in 
Article 15(5), it was contended that this was done to conform with 
the Constitutional mandate of additional protection for minorities 
under Article 30.  It was argued that Article 15(5) does not override 
Article 15(4).  They have to be read together as supplementary to 
each other and Article 15(5) being an additional provision, there is 
no conflict between Article 15(4) and Article 15(5). Article 15(4), 
15(5), 29(2), 30(1), and 30(2) all together constitute a Code in 
relation to admission to educational institutions.  They have to be 
harmoniously construed in the light of the Preamble and Part IV of 
the Constitution.  It was also contended that the Article 15(5) does 
not interfere with the executive power of the State and there is no 
violation of the proviso to Article 368.

46.	The Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment does not 
specifically or impliedly make any change in Article 162. Article 
15(5) does not seek to make any change in Article 162 either 
directly or indirectly.  The field of legislation as to "education" was 
in Entry 11 of List II.  By virtue of the 42nd Amendment of the 
Constitution, "education", which was in Entry 11 in List II, was 
deleted and inserted as Entry 25 in List III.  The executive power of 
the State is not touched by the present Constitutional Amendment.

47.	Article 15(5) does not abrogate the fundamental right enshrined 
under Article 19(1)(g).  If at all there is an abridgement of 
Fundamental Right, it is in a limited area of admission to 
educational institutions and such abridgement does not violate the 
basic structure of the Constitution.  In any way, Constitutional 
Amendments giving effect to Directive Principles of the State 
Policy would not offend the basic structure of the Constitution.

48.	The Right to Equality enshrined in our Constitution is not merely 
a formal right or a vacuous declaration.  Affirmative action though 
apparently discriminatory is calculated to produce equality on a 
broader basis.  By eliminating de facto inequalities and placing the 
weaker sections of the community on a footing of equality with the  
stronger and more powerful sections so that each member of the 
community whatever is his birth, occupation or social position may 
be, enjoys equal opportunity of using to the full, his natural 
endowments of physique, of character and of intelligence.

49.	Shri Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel, further contended that 
the Act 5 of 2007 is a constitutionally valid piece of legislation.  
Under Section 2(g) of Act 5 of 2007, there is no excessive 
delegation. The plea of the petitioners that the Parliament itself 
should have determined OBCs and that Act 5 of 2007 suffers from 
excessive delegation or lack of guidelines is not tenable.  The 
backward classes of citizens have to be identified on the materials 
and evidence and therefore the Parliament necessarily has to 
leave it to the Executive.  The determination of OBCs is a long-
drawn process which would cause enormous delay.  Therefore, it 
was appropriate to leave the identification to the Executive.  Such 
determination of each class as backward class would be open to 
judicial review.  And the scope of judicial review would be wider if 
the same is made by the Executive rather than by the Parliament.  

50.	It is also contended that merely because no time limit is fixed, 
Act 5 of 2007 cannot be rendered invalid.  The Parliament has got 
the power to review periodically and either make modifications in 
the Act or repeal the Act.  It is for the first time certain special 
provisions are being made in favour of socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens, SCs and STs for reservation of seats 
in Central Educational Institutions after 56 years of coming into 
force of the Constitution.  At its very commencement, a time limit 
may not be anticipated and fixed.  Over a period of time depending 
upon the result of the measures taken and improvements in the 
status and educational advancement of the SCs, STs and SEBCs, 
the matter could always be reviewed.  The Act cannot be struck 
down at the very commencement on the ground no time limit for its 
operation has been fixed.  

51.	It was also submitted that the quantum of reservation provided 
under the Act is valid.  The ratio of population is a relevant 
consideration in fixing the quantum of reservation.  Reservation in 
favour of OBCs is 27% and by adding the percentage of 
reservation for SCs and STs, the total quantum of reservation does 
not exceed 50%.  It is indisputable that the population of OBCs 
exceeds 27% and SCs and STs constitute more than 22 =%.  The 
quantum of reservation within 50% has been determined by the 
Parliament based on facts considered by legislature and they are 
conclusive and the Courts do not exercise the power of judicial 
review by examining those facts.  

52.	The learned Senior Counsel also contended that the contention 
of the Petitioners that special provisions can only be made up to 
10+2 stage is untenable.  If this plea is accepted, it would result in 
higher education being the privilege of the higher classes only and 
it would be a distortion of the concept of social advancement of the 
downtrodden and the negation of the goal envisaged by the 
Preamble.  It was also contended that the principle of reverse 
discrimination is not applicable.  The Doctrine of Strict Scrutiny and 
Narrow Tailoring are not applicable in India as they are American 
doctrines which operate under different facts and circumstances.  
This court on earlier occasion had rejected these pleas, when 
dealing with admission to Post-graduate Medical Courses, when 
75% of seats were being reserved on the basis of institutional 
preference. 

53.	The learned Senior Counsel further contended that the 
exclusion of creamy layer has no application to SCs and STs in 
regard to employment and education.  Articles 341, 342, 366(24) 
and 366(25) of the Constitution would militate against such course 
of action.  

54.	It was held in E.V. Chinnaiah Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh &amp; 
Ors. , that the SCs and STs form a single class.  The 
observations in Nagaraj's case (supra) cannot be construed as 
requiring exclusion of creamy layer in SCs and STs.  Creamy layer 
principle was applied for the identification of backward classes of 
citizens. And it was specifically held in Indra Sawhney's case, 
(supra) that the above discussion was confined to Other Backward 
Classes and has no relevance in the case of Scheduled Tribes and 
Scheduled Castes.  The observations of the Supreme Court in 
Nagaraj's case (supra) should not be read as conflicting with the 
decision in Indra Sawhney's case (supra).  The observations in 
Nagaraj's case  (supra) as regards SCs and STs are obiter.  In 
regard to SCs and STs, there can be no concept of creamy layer.  

55.	Once the President of India has determined the list of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, it is only by a law made 
by the Parliament that there can be exclusion from the list of 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.  As far as OBCs are 
concerned, the principle of exclusion of creamy lawyer is 
applicable only for Article 16(4).  It has no application to Article 
15(4) or 15(5) as education stands on a different footing.  

56.	Equality of opportunity of education is a must for every citizen 
and the doctrine of "creamy layer" is inapplicable and inappropriate 
in the context of giving opportunity for education.  In the matter of 
education there cannot be any exclusion on the ground of creamy 
layer.  Such exclusion would only be counter productive and would 
retard the development and progress of the groups and 
communities and their eventual integration with the rest of the 
society.  

57.	It was further argued that Article 15(4) and 15(5) are provisions 
of power coupled with duty.  It is the constitutional duty to apply 
these principles in the governance of the country and in making 
law for the reason that it is a constitutional promise of social justice 
which has to be redeemed.  

58.	It was strongly contended by the learned Senior Counsel       
Shri Parasaran that the validity of the constitutional amendment 
and the validity of plenary legislation have to be decided purely on 
the basis of constitutional law.  And the submission, as it was 
contended that the Amendment has a vote catching mechanism is 
inappropriate.  The contention that the Ninety-Third Constitutional 
Amendment is against the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
is also not tenable.  Right to Equality of Opportunity operates at 
every level and it is being provided for a particular level either by a 
legislative or an executive action.  The merit has to be interpreted 
in the context of egalitarian equality and not formal equality.  

59.	It was also submitted that the speeches in the Parliament, 
constitutional debates, text books of authors and views expressed 
in articles do not normally constitute evidence before the Court to 
determine the Constitutional validity of the legislations.

60.	Shri G.E. Vahanvati, learned Solicitor General of India 
appearing on behalf of the Union of India, submitted that the 
argument of Shri Harish Salve, learned Senior Counsel that the 
American doctrine of "strict scrutiny" should be applied to the 
affirmative action envisaged under Article 15(5) is not correct.  It 
was argued that the impugned legislation is not ex facie 
discriminatory and, therefore, it cannot be classified as a "suspect 
legislation". It was argued that right that from the case of           
The General Manager Southern Railway   Vs.  Rangachari,  
Article 16(4) is an exception to Article 16(1) and this reasoning was 
followed in M.R. Balaji &amp; Others  Vs.  State of Mysore  by a five 
Judge Bench.  Thereafter, the same view prevailed  in T. 
Devadasan  Vs.  The Union of India &amp; Anr.  But Subba Rao. J. 
(as he then was) said that "the expression 'nothing in this article'  
is a legislative device to express its intention in a most emphatic 
way that the power conferred there under is not limited in any way 
by the main provision but falls outside it" .   The view that Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) are exceptions to Article 15(1) and 16(1) 
respectively was again reiterated in Triloki Nath Vs.  State of 
Jammu &amp; Kashmir &amp; Ors. (II)   and in The State of Andhra 
Pradesh &amp; Ors.   Vs.  U.S.V. Balram, Etc .  The learned Solicitor 
General further pointed out that in State of Kerala &amp; Anr. Vs  
N.M. Thomas &amp; Ors.   the majority opinion held that Articles 14, 
15 and 16 are parts of the scheme of equality and that Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) are not exceptions to Articles 15(1) and 16(1) 
respectively.  The said change in N.M. Thomas's case  (supra) 
was noticed by Justice Chinnappa Reddy in K.C. Vasanth Kumar 
&amp; Anr.   Vs.  State of Karnataka   and the same view was upheld 
in Indra Sawhney's case (supra).  The learned Solicitor General 
further contended that once it is accepted that Articles 15(4) and 
16(4) are not exceptions to Articles 15(1) and 16(1) respectively, 
then there is no question of treating the social welfare measure as 
being 'facially discriminatory' or  "ex facie"  violative of the rule of 
equality.  It was argued that it is not simply a matter of legal 
equality.  De jure equality must ultimately find its raison d'etre in de 
facto equality.  The State must, therefore, resort to compensatory 
State action for the purpose of uplifting people who are factually 
unequal in their wealth, education or social environment.  Relying 
on the observations of Subba Rao, J. in      T. Devadasan's case 
(supra), it was argued that centuries of calculated oppression and 
habitual submission has reduced a considerable section of our 
community to a life of serfdom and it would be well nigh impossible 
to raise their standards if the doctrine of equal opportunity was 
strictly enforced in their case and they would not have any change 
if they were made to enter the open field of competition without 
adventitious aids till such time when they could stand on their own 
legs.  Laying reliance on the observations made in N.M. Thomas's 
case (supra) and also in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), the 
learned Solicitor General argued that under Articles 15(4) and 
16(4) the State is obliged to remove inequalities and 
backwardness from society.  It was further submitted that the 
American doctrine of "strict scrutiny" had been expressly rejected 
by this Court in Saurabh Chaudri &amp; Ors.  Vs.   Union of India &amp; 
Ors.    As regards identification of backward classes, the learned 
Solicitor General  contended that while dealing with the aspect of 
identification of backwardness for socially and educationally 
backward classes, it cannot be denied that there is backwardness 
in this country; that large sections of the country are socially and 
educationally backward; that this problem is not new but is age old; 
that such backwardness arose because of certain peculiarities of 
the caste system which proceeded on the assumption that the 
choice of occupation of members of a caste was pre-determined in 
many castes; and that members of particular castes were 
prohibited from engaging themselves in occupations other than 
those certain occupations which were considered to be degrading 
and impure and considered fit only for those castes.  It was pointed 
out that Chief Justice Wanchoo in C.A. Rajendran   Vs.  Union of 
India &amp; Ors.   held that the main criteria for inclusion in the list is 
social and educational backwardness of the castes based on the 
occupation pursued by those castes.  Reference was made to 
various decisions rendered by this Court on this issue, especially        
Minor A. Peeriakaruppan &amp; Anr.  Vs. State of Tamil Nadu &amp; 
Ors. ; U.S.V. Balram (supra); K.C. Vasanth Kumar (supra), 
referred to earlier.  The learned Solicitor General also pointed out 
that in  B. Venkataramana   Vs.  The State of Madras &amp; Anr. ,  
the list of backward classes as mentioned in Schedule 3 to the 
Madras Provincial and Subordinate Services Rule, 1942  was 
approved and which was also noticed in Indra Sawhney's case 
(supra).  Reference was also made to the debates in Parliament 
where Dr. Ambedkar stated that "the backward classes are nothing 
but collection of certain castes".  It was further contended that it is 
incorrect to say that the majority in Indra Sawhney's case (supra) 
did not accept or approve the Mandal Commission Report.  That 
Report was referred to in several places in that judgment and the 
criterion adopted by the Mandal Commission to classify the 
backward classes was more or less accepted.  The learned 
Solicitor General also pointed out that it is not correct to say that 
the State Lists are defective and that they ought not to have been 
accepted by the Central Government.  It is pointed out that the 
Central List has been operating for 14 years for the purposes of 
reservations of posts and not a single person has challenged any 
inclusion in the Central List as being void or illegal; that the State 
Lists have also been operating both for the purposes of Articles 
16(4) and 15(4) and there has been no challenge at all in any High 
Court or in the Supreme Court with regard to the State List and 
that there has not been a single complaint made before the State 
Government or the National Commission with regard to over-
inclusion of any caste or community.  The learned Solicitor 
General pointed out that the allegations in relation to the working 
of the National Commission for the Backward Classes are not true. 
The National Commission has framed elaborate guidelines for 
consideration of request for inclusion and complaints of non-
inclusion in the Central List for other backward classes. The 
guidelines have been framed after studying the criteria/indicators 
framed by the Mandal Commission and the Commissions set up in 
the past by different State Governments. The National 
Commission held 236 public hearings at various places since its 
inception. The National Commission had also prepared an 
elaborate questionnaire for considering classes for inclusion in the 
State Lists. Detailed data was required to be submitted with regard 
to social, educational  and economic criteria of the communities 
that were considered. It is pointed out that during the period of its 
functioning the National Commission recommended 297 requests 
for inclusion and at the same time rejected 288 requests for 
inclusion of main castes. It was further pointed out that the 
National Commission has not mechanically allowed all applications 
for inclusion in the Central List.  The National Commission while 
examining the applications had taken note of the ethnographic 
history of the concerned castes/sub-groups/communities and it has 
also taken note of the recommendations of the various State 
Commissions.  It was also submitted that the contention that the 
inclusion of the caste in OBCs was motivated by political 
considerations is erroneous and the National Commission had 
emphatically rejected politically dominant castes such as the 
Marathas from being included in the Central List and several other 
castes were thus excluded from OBCs list.  The learned Solicitor 
General also contended that the plea that reservation under Article 
15(5) with reference to Article 29(2) would render 15(5) 
constitutionally violative is incorrect.  Article 29(2) is a protection 
given by the Constitution against denial of admission to 
educational institutions on the ground of religion, race, caste, 
language or any of them. It does not apply if provision is made for 
backward classes when the basis for classification is not solely on 
these grounds.  It was argued further that the American doctrines 
and tests relating to "strict scrutiny", "compelling State necessity"   
and "narrow tailoring" are tests which are not applicable to India at 
all.  There is a presumption of constitutionality of the legislations 
passed by Parliament. The Indian Constitution specifically provides 
provisions like Articles 15(4) and 16(4) which permit special 
provisions for backward classes.  It was also contended that it is 
incorrect to suggest that there have been no efforts on the part of 
successive Governments to concentrate on elementary education 
towards universal elementary education.  "Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan"  
(SSA)  had been launched by the Government in 2001-2002.  The 
learned Solicitor General also pointed out that it is incorrect to say 
that there has been no proper consideration of the Bill in 
Parliament, particularly in relation to Financial Memorandum. It is 
pointed that debates in Parliament are not usually relevant for 
construction of the provisions of an Act.  The learned Solicitor 
General also submitted that it cannot seriously be disputed that 
large sections of the population are socially and educationally 
backward and it is nobody's case that the total population of OBCs 
in this country is less than 27%.  Even on the basis of the facts 
relied on by the petitioners, namely, National Sample Survey 
Organisation (NSSO), the total population of OBCs in India is 
around 36%.  The NSSO had conducted this survey for the 
preparation of its 61st Round of survey which was published in 
October 2006.  This survey indicated that the total number of 
OBCs in India is around 41%.  27% reservation in relation to 
admission had been upheld in Indra Sawhney's case (supra) and 
the Parliament has taken special care to see that this reservation 
does not affect seats in the general category.  The learned 
Solicitor General also pointed out that the policy of reservation 
flows from the mandate of equality till the time the Constitutional 
objective of real equality is achieved.  Moreover, the policy of 
reservation has been introduced for the first time after 56 years of 
coming into force of the Constitution. The learned Solicitor General 
also pointed out that meticulous care has been taken for the 
inclusion of certain castes in the OBCs list and reference was 
made to cases in Rajasthan, Karnataka and Kerala.

61.	Shri Gopal Subramanium, the learned Additional Solicitor 
General, supported the Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) 
Act, 2005 and also the provisions of Act 5 of 2007.  The learned 
Additional Solicitor General submitted that the American doctrines 
are not applicable to India.  In this regard, the observations of this 
Court in A.K. Roy  Vs. Union of India &amp; Ors. ,  that   "we cannot 
transplant, in the Indian context and conditions, principles which 
took birth in other soils, without a careful examination of their 
relevance to the interpretation of our Constitution"   were cited.   It 
is pointed by the learned Additional Solicitor General that 
prepositions enunciated in the decisions of the United States 
Supreme Court in Regents of the University of California  Vs.  
Bakke , Grutter  Vs. Bollinger  and  Gratz  Vs.  Bollinger ,  
and  Parents Involved in Community Schools   Vs.  Seattle 
School District , that the Court will apply the standard of strict 
scrutiny while reviewing legislation involving suspect classification; 
that and such legislation would be effected if two conditions are 
met, namely, (i)  there is a compelling governmental interest in 
making the classification,  and (ii)  the legislation has been 
narrowly tailored to meet that classification;  that the classification 
based on race is a suspect classification and that  accordingly 
while race can be a factor in admission policies of educational 
institutions, it cannot be the sole factor and it cannot lead to the 
imposition of quotas, which are per se unconstitutional -  each of 
these propositions has been rejected in Indian law and the Indian 
Constitution neither admits "suspect classification" nor "strict 
scrutiny".  The constitutionality of quotas has been repeatedly 
affirmed and reliance by the Petitioners on the United States 
"affirmative action" judgments is wholly misconceived.  The 
learned Additional Solicitor General  has made special reference to 
various American decisions on the doctrine of "affirmative action".  
The learned Additional Solicitor General  has also referred to the 
decisions of this Court in N.M. Thomas' case (supra) and   K.C. 
Vasanth kumar's case (supra) and other decisions to contend that 
Articles 16(4) and 15(4) are not exceptions to Articles 16(1) and 
15(1) respectively and these provisions have to be read together 
with the principles of governance set out in Part IV of the 
Constitution and it is beyond doubt that underlying constitutional 
obligations are towards socially and educationally backward 
classes and there is a positive obligation on the State to take steps 
to eradicate their backwardness. The learned Additional Solicitor 
General also refuted the contentions advanced by Shri P.P. Rao, 
learned Senior Counsel, and contended that all efforts have been 
made by the Government to improve primary and upper primary 
education in India. The learned Additional Solicitor General also 
contended that the argument advanced by Dr. Rajeev Dhavan is 
not correct.  He relied upon Arjun Sen Gupta's  Report   wherein it 
is stated :-

"..Education can be a liberating capability but 
access to it is made difficult, if not impossible, by 
such inherited characteristics as lower social status, 
rural origin, informal work status and gender or a 
combination of these."

62.	Shri Ram Jethmalani, learned Senior Counsel  appearing for 
the Intervener-Rashtriya Janta Dal Party in W.P. No. 313 of 2007 
and W.P. No. 335 of 2007, contended that the attempt of the 
petitioners in these writ petitions is to off-set the decision of the 
Nine Judges Bench in Indra Sawhney's case (supra). It is pointed 
out that the equality of citizens is the basic feature of the Indian 
Constitution but by "equality" is meant not "formal or technical 
equality" but  "real and substantial equality".  The word "only" used 
in Articles 15(1) and 16(2) is decisive.  Even if reservations are 
made for castes, the classification will become invalid if it is only 
on the basis of caste and if some other additional requirement is 
imposed,  that case would be considered to be outside the 
prohibition of Article 15(1).    Reference is made to B. 
Venkataramana's case (supra).  It was contended that a statute 
cannot be declared ultra vires merely because backwardness is a 
complex concept and no precise definition is possible.  The Court 
is bound to assume that a state of facts existed at the time of the 
enactment of the statute which would validate that statute and 
when the Constitution of the United States came into effect it did 
not contain the constitutional right of equality.  Even the Vth 
Amendment of 1971 to the Constitution of the United States of 
America did not introduce this concept.  The XIVth Amendment of 
1868 provided that the "State shall not deny to any person the 
equal protection of the laws".  Even after this injunction,  the United 
States Supreme Court delivered the judgment in Plessy  Vs.  
Ferguson ,  which laid down the doctrine of  "Equal but 
Separate".    This doctrine was in force till it was reversed in 1954.  
The learned Senior Counsel also contended that the policy of 
reservation is not destructive of merit and that the Symbiosis 
University is not covered by the statute. 

63.	Shri T.R. Andhyarujina, the learned Senior Counsel appearing 
for the respondents in W.P. 265/2006, contended that Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) operate in different fields and Article 15(4) enables 
the State Government to make special provisions for backward 
classes, SCs and STs which can be done both by law or by 
executive order.  The special provision in Article 15(4) is not 
restricted to advancement of SEBCs, SCs and STs in educational 
institutions only and enables the State to make several kinds of 
positive action programmes in addition to reservations.  As a 
condition for giving aid, the State can make reservations for 
SEBCs, SCs and STs in educational institutions which are State 
owned or State aided.    The State, however, cannot make such 
reservations in private unaided educational institutions, as held by 
this Court in T.M.A. Pai Foundation  (supra) and P.A. Inamdar 
(supra).  This disability was because of T.M.A. Pai Foundation 
(supra) which provided that private unaided educational institutions 
had a fundamental right to "occupation" of carrying on education 
under Article 19(1)(g).  Therefore, the Parliament introduced Article 
15(5) by the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act to enable 
the State to make special provisions for the advancement of SCs, 
STs and SEBCs in relation to a specific subject, namely, 
admission in educational institutions including private educational 
institutions whether aided or unaided by the State notwithstanding 
the provisions of Article 19(1)(g).  However,  Article 15(5) excluded 
private educational institutions which are minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30.  The saving for 
minority educational institutions in Article 15(5) is really ex 
abundandi cautela as minority educational institutions were 
constitutionally protected and at all times considered different from 
other private educational institutions.   Article 15(5) does not take 
away the "basic structure" of the Constitution. The  "basic 
structure" of the Constitution   should not be trivialized to mean 
other features of the Constitution.  Reference was made to the 
observations made by  Khanna, J. in Kesavananda Bharati's 
case (supra).  It was also submitted that Article 15(5) does not 
amend Entry 25 List III to the extent that the State can no more 
make laws for reservation of seats in minority educational 
institutions and, therefore, it is incorrect to say that the amendment 
in Article 15(5) required ratification under Article 368(2).  The 
State's power to legislate under Article 245 is always subject to the 
other provisions of the Constitution, including fundamental rights.   
Article 15(4) does not take away the power of the State to make 
reservations in its own institutions by an executive action under 
Article 162.  Right to carry on business is not a part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution. 

64.	On behalf of the respondent/State of Bihar in Writ Petition (Civil) 
No. 269/2007, learned Senior Counsel Shri Rakesh Dwivedi 
submitted that the use of non-obstante clauses in Article 15(3), (4) 
and (5) vis-a-vis Article 15(1) shows that the prohibition against 
use of only caste as a ground for discrimination qua any citizen is 
there in so far as making of a special provision for advancement of 
prescribed categories is concerned.  There is no repugnance 
between 15(4) and 15(5).  It was contended that in Kesavananda 
Bharati's case (supra), it was held that "Part III of the Constitution 
could be amended subject to the basic structure doctrine".  The 
view which was held in   I.C. Golak  Nath &amp; Ors.   Vs. State of 
Punjab &amp; Anrs,  making Article 368 more restrictive, had been 
overruled in Kesavananda Bharati's case (supra).  The 
Fundamental Rights are not absolute and are designed to suffer 
reasonable restrictions and classifications.  Any sort of 
abridgement by Constitutional Amendment is clearly permissible 
so long as the invasion does not amount to total elimination or 
emasculation.  Within the domain of equality there is distinction 
between formal equality and real equality or equality in fact and 
both are comprehended in Article 14 and both are part of the basic 
structure.

65.	The learned Senior Counsel also contended that the judicial 
review ideas of "suspect classification", "strict scrutiny", 
"compelling State interest" and "narrow tailoring" are measures 
propounded by the U.S. Supreme Court are not applicable and the 
Supreme Court of India has consistently taken a view that the 
judgments of the U.S. Supreme Court do not afford safe guidance 
on account of differing structure of the provisions under the two 
constitutions and the social conditions in these two countries being 
different.  

66.	Reference was made to the various decisions of this court and it 
was argued that the comparison of the 14th Amendment of the US 
Supreme Court read with Civil Rights Act, 1964 on the one hand 
and the fascicules of equality provisions in the Constitution of 
India, i.e. Articles 14 to 18 on the other hand shows that the 
equality provisions of our Constitution are not only differently 
structured but it contains provisions for making special provisions 
for the advancement of SEBCs &amp; SCs/STs.  It is pointed out that 
our Constitution additionally enshrines Directive Principles of State 
Policy in Part-IV of the Constitution requiring the State to strive to 
promote justice social, economic and political and to minimize the 
inequalities in income and endeavour to remove inequalities in 
status, facilities and opportunities (Article 38).

67.	Shri Ravivarma Kumar, learned Senior Counsel appearing for 
Pattali Makkal Katchi, contended that the creamy layer principle 
shall not be invoked for the purpose of Article 15(5).  According to 
the Counsel, reservation in educational institutions is not a poverty 
alleviation programme nor it is a programme to eradicate 
unemployment.  Reservation under Article 15(5) is not even a 
programme to educate all the backward classes.  According to the 
Counsel the one and only goal of the reservation policy under 
Clause 4 &amp; 5 of Article 15 of the Constitution is to bring about 
equality among various castes and unless all the castes are 
brought to one level playing field, the caste system cannot be 
eradicated.  It is intended for removal of inequality between castes 
so that the castes will come together.  These provisions are 
designed to bring together the leaders of each caste and 
community together and the same can be achieved only if the best 
teachers, the best administrators, the best doctors, the best 
engineers and the best lawyers are brought together.  And so long 
as the gap in education persists between castes, the castes will 
not come together.  It is only when each backward caste is 
permitted to advance educationally to meet the educational level of 
upper castes, can there be a real egalitarian society.  According to 
the Counsel, it is precisely for this reason that Clause (2) of Article 
38 seeks to eliminate inequality in status, facilities and 
opportunities, not only among individuals, but also among groups 
of people.  Therefore, it is to provide for such equality in status, 
facilities and opportunities, that reservation is contemplated to 
those castes which are socially and educationally below other 
castes.   If the best from the lower caste are deprived of these 
facilities and opportunities in the name of "creamy layer", it will be 
counter productive and frustrate the very object of reservation, 
namely to achieve equality in status, facilities and opportunities.  

68.	The Counsel also contended that the question of prescribing 
prior time limit for reservation under the impugned Act is immature 
and should not be considered at this stage. 

69.	The link between "caste" and its occupation is an unbreakable 
bondage to which the caste system has condemned the backward 
classes.  Whether a backward caste man carries on his traditional 
occupation or not, he continues to be socially identified with the 
said occupation.  This link between the caste and the occupation 
has not been severed for thousands of years and it cannot be 
broken by arguments and theories.  The ground reality is that 
every caste in every village is identified by its traditional 
occupation.  And all the service communities continue to discharge 
their traditional occupation.  It is pointed out that throughout the 
country in 6.5 lakh villages, it is the barber communities and barber 
communities alone, which carry on the traditional occupation of 
hair cuttings and no other community has taken up the said 
occupation. And they continue to labour without any social security 
or whatsoever.  

70.	The Counsel pointed out that the last six decennial censuses 
have eschewed recording of caste particulars, the three National 
Commissions and scores of State Commissions have found these 
Census data useless in identification of Backward Classes.  
71.	The learned Counsel submitted that there is no justification for 
not collecting details of caste identity at the decennial census 
operation. According to the Counsel a massive exercise is 
rendered useless for the all important work of identification of 
Backward Classes.

72.	It is further submitted that the entire identification of backward 
classes has not been done on the basis of 1931 Census data.  In 
each State the identification of Backward Classes has been done 
on the basis of criteria evolved by the State Commissions on 
social, educational and economic parameters.  Each State has 
adopted its own methodology.  The identification of backward 
classes is essentially done at the State level on a very objective 
criteria and a scientific methodology.    According to the Counsel, 
origin of the term "classes of citizens" may be traced to the later 
part of the 19th century.  Quite often classes have been 
interchangeably used with castes, tribes and communities.  Some 
of the earlier Committee reports referred to Depressed Classes.    
Under the 1919 Act, Governors of the provinces give instruction to 
take measures for the social and industrial welfare of the people 
and tending to fit all classes of population.  And the Provincial 
Governments prepared a list of Backward Classes with three parts 
namely, Depressed Classes, Aboriginal Tribes and Backward 
Communities.  Dr. Ambedkar demanded separate electorate for 
the Depressed Classes at the Round Table Conference.

73.	The Counsel also pointed out that the building of a casteless 
society is not the goal of the Constitution.  And that it is futile to 
contend that caste should not be considered for any purpose 
whatsoever.  In every conceivable activity of private life caste 
system plays an important role.  There are hundreds of communal 
hostels and educational institutions owned and managed by 
certain communities.  Some castes and communities have 
communal clubs, associations, cooperatives, banks etc.  Their 
membership and admission are confined to a particular caste or 
community.  Even carrying of the caste names is the guaranteed 
right of every citizen.  There is nothing in the Constitution to 
prohibit a person from discriminating on the ground only of caste or 
community in matters relating to marriage, electing candidates to 
political position etc.  Most of the professional colleges like 
medical, dental and engineering colleges are established and 
administered by a body of persons exclusively belonging to a class 
or a community.  Though Dr. Ambedkar intended to abolish caste 
system by abolishing all the privileges and disabilities of the 
forward classes, the plea was opposed by Shri K.M. Munshi and 
the Draft Article 3(4) stated:

"Un-touchability is abolished and its practice thereof is 
punishable by the law of the Union".

74.	The Constitution never prohibits the practice of caste and 
casteism.  Every activity in Hindu society, from cradle to grave is 
carried on solely on the basis of one's caste.  Even after death, a 
Hindu is not allowed to be cremated in the crematorium which is 
maintained for the exclusive use of the other caste or community.  
Dalits are not permitted to be buried in graves or cremated in 
crematoriums where upper caste people bury or cremate their 
dead.  Christians have their own graveyards.  Muslims are not 
allowed to be buried in the Hindu crematoriums and vice-versa.  
Thus, caste rules the roost in the life of a Hindu and even after his 
death.  In such circumstances, it is entirely fallacious to advance 
this argument on the ground that the Constitution has prohibited 
the use of caste.  It was argued what the Constitution aims at is 
achievement of equality between the castes and not elimination of 
castes.  

75.	The learned Senior Counsel points out that it would be utopian 
to expect that by ignoring caste, the castes will perish.  And the 
Counsel contended the Constitution has not abolished the caste 
system much less has it prohibited its use.  The Counsel pointed 
out that the Constitutional Amendment under the impugned Act in 
favour of backward classes is an unprecedented leap taking the 
higher education in the country forward, without depriving a single 
seat to the forward castes.  And the advanced castes, with a 
population of less than 20% would still be able to get 50% of the 
seats in the name of merit disproportionate to their known 
proportion of their population.  It is contended that without the 
advancement of SCs, STs and OBCs constituting over 80% 
population and mainly living in rural areas, it will not be possible to 
take the nation forward.  And the students who are admitted under 
the reserved quota have performed much better than the students 
admitted on the basis of merit.  The learned Counsel also placed 
reliance on the Moily Report  Case studies from four States.

76.	The main challenge in these writ petitions is the constitutional 
validity of the Act 5 of 2007. This legislation was passed by 
Parliament consequent upon The Constitution (Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2005, by which sub-article (5) was inserted in 
Article 15 of the Constitution.  The constitutionality of this 
amendment has also been challenged in the various writ petitions 
filed by the petitioners.   As the Act itself is based on the 
Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005, the validity of 
the Act depends on the fact whether the Constitution (Ninety-Third  
Amendment) Act, 2005 itself is valid or not.  Article 15  of the 
Constitution, after the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 
2005, reads as follows :-  

"15. Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of 
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
(1) The State shall not discriminate against any citizen 
on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of 
birth or any of them.
(2)  No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, 
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be subject to 
any disability, liability, restriction or condition with 
regard to,--

(a)	access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and 
places of public entertainment; or
(b)	the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and 
places of public resort maintained wholly or partly out 
of State funds or dedicated to the use of the general 
public.

(3) Nothing in this Article shall prevent the State from 
making any special provision for women and children.
(4) Nothing in this Article or in clause (2) of Article 29 
shall prevent the State from making any special 
provision for the advancement of any socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens or for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
(5) Nothing in this Article or sub-clause (g) of clause 
(1) of Article 19 shall prevent the State from making 
any provision by law for the advancement of any 
socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens or the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes in so far as such special provision relate to 
their admission to the educational institutions, 
including private educational institutions whether 
aided or unaided by the State other minority 
educational institutions referred to in clause (1) of 
Article 30."

77.	 	T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) held that a private unaided 
educational institution has the fundamental right under Article 
19(1)(g) of the Constitution as the running of an educational 
institution was treated as an "occupation"  and further that the 
State's regulation in such institutions would not be regarded as a 
reasonable restriction on that fundamental right to carry on 
business under  Article 19(6). This decision necessitated the 
Ninety-Third  Amendment to the Constitution since as a result of 
T.M.A. Pai Foundation  (supra) the State would not be in a 
position to control or regulate the admission in private educational 
institutions. At the outset, it may have to be stated that no 
educational institution has come up to challenge the Constitution 
(Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005.  The challenge about the 
constitutionality of the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 
2005 has been advanced by the petitioners, who based their 
contentions on the equality principles enunciated in Articles 14, 15 
and 16 of the Constitution.    

78.	The Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 is 
challenged on many grounds.  The first ground of attack is that if 
the Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005 is allowed to 
stand it would be against the "basic structure"  of the Constitution 
itself and this Amendment seriously abridges the equality 
principles guaranteed under Article 15 and other provisions of the 
Constitution.  Another contention raised by the petitioners' Counsel 
is that the Golden Triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21 is not to be 
altered and the balance and structure of these constitutional 
provisions has been ousted by the Constitution (Ninety-Third  
Amendment) Act, 2005.   Yet another contention urged by         
Shri K.K. Venugopal, learned Senior Counsel, is that Article 15(4) 
and 15(5) are mutually exclusive and under Article 15(5) the 
minority educational institutions are excluded.  According to him, 
this is a clear contravention of the secular and equality principles.  
The learned Senior Counsel also pointed out that minority 
institutions are not severable from the purview of Article 15(5) and 
therefore, the whole Constitution (Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 
2005 is to be declared illegal.   Another argument advanced by the 
learned Senior Counsel is that there is inconsistency between 
Article 15(4) and Article 15(5) and by virtue of the Constitution 
(Ninety-Third  Amendment) Act, 2005, the States are devoid of 
their wide power under Article 15(5) to make reservation in 
minority educational institutions which are getting aid from the 
States and thus it is violative of the very essence of equality.  He 
further argued that the Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 
2005 could control the legislative and executive power of the State 
and, therefore, it is not constitutionally valid.   The learned Counsel 
had further challenged the validity of Act 5 of 2007, with which we 
will deal separately.  

1.   Whether Ninety-Third  Amendment of the Constitution is 
against the "basic structure" of the Constitution?

79.	The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005, by 
which clause (5) was added to Article 15 of the Constitution, is an 
enabling provision which states that nothing in Article 15 or in    
sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article 19 shall prevent the State 
from making any special provision, by law, for the advancement of 
any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for 
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes in so far as such 
special provisions relate to their admission to the educational 
institutions including private educational institutions, whether aided 
or unaided by the State.  Of course, minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of Article 30 are excluded. 
Thus, the newly added clause (5) of Article 15 is sought to be 
applied to educational institutions whether aided or unaided. In 
other words, this newly added constitutional provision would 
enable the State to make any special provision by law for 
admission in private educational institutions whether aided or 
unaided.  In all the petitions which have been filed before us the 
main challenge is against Act 5 of 2007.  Act 5 of 2007 has been 
enacted to provide reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tribes and SEBCs of citizens in Central Educational 
Institutions.  The "Central Educational Institution" has been defined 
under Section 2(d) of the Act.  They are institutions established or 
incorporated by or under the Central Act or set up by an Act of 
Parliament or deemed Universities maintained by or receiving aid 
from the Central Government or institutions maintained by or 
receiving aid from the Central Government or educational 
institutions set up by the Central Government under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860.  Act 5 of 2007 is not intended to provide 
reservation in "private unaided" educational institutions.  None of 
the private unaided educational institutions have filed petitions 
before us challenging the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment.  
Though the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners have 
challenged the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment on various 
grounds, they were vis-`-vis the challenge to Act 5 of 2007.  The 
counter to the challenge by the learned Solicitor General as well as 
by Shri K. Parasaran, learned Senior Counsel was also in that 
context.  We do not want to enter a finding as to whether the 
Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment is violative of the "basic 
structure" of the Constitution so far as it relates to "private unaided" 
educational institutions.  In the absence of challenge by private 
unaided educational institutions, it would not be proper to 
pronounce upon the constitutional validity of that part of the 
Constitutional Amendment.  As the main challenge in these 
various petitions  was only regarding the provisions of Act 5 of 
2007, which related to state maintained institutions, the challenge 
to the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment so far as it relates to 
private unaided educational institutions, does not strictly arise in 
these proceedings.  In the absence of challenge by private 
unaided institutions, it may not be proper for this Court to decide 
whether the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment is violative of 
the "basic structure" of the Constitution so far as it relates to 
private unaided educational institutions merely because we are 
considering its validity in the context of Act 5 of 2007.

We feel that such questions could be decided as the main 
questions that are involved in these petitions are specific regarding 
Act 5 of 2007, we leave open the question as to whether the 
Ninety-Third Amendment to the Constitution by which sub-clause 
(5) was inserted is violative of the basic structure doctrine or not so 
far as it relates to "private unaided" educational institutions to be 
decided in other appropriate cases.  We deal only with the 
question of whether the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment is 
constitutionally valid so far as it relates to the state maintained 
institutions and aided educational institutions.

80.	Several contentions have been advanced by the petitioners' 
Counsel challenging the constitutional validity of the Constitution 
(Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005.  The main argument was on 
the ground that this amendment is against the "basic structure" of 
the Constitution.  In order to appreciate the contention of the 
petitioners' Counsel, it is necessary to understand the "basic 
structure" theory that has been propounded in the celebrated case 
of Kesavananda Bharati (supra).  This case was a decision of 13 
Judge Bench of this Court. Though the Judges were not 
unanimous about what the "basic structure" of the Constitution be, 
however, Shelat J.  (at page 280) in his judgment had indicated the 
following basic features of the Constitution :-

"The basic structure of the Constitution is not a 
vague concept and the apprehensions expressed 
on behalf of the respondents that neither the citizen 
nor the Parliament would be able to understand it 
are unfounded.  If the historical background, the 
Preamble, the entire scheme of the Constitution, the 
relevant provisions thereof including Article 368 are 
kept in mind there can be no difficulty in discerning 
that the following can be regarded as the basic 
elements of the constitutional structure.  (These 
cannot be catalogued but can only be illustrated) :-

1.  	The supremacy of the Constitution.
2.	Republican and Democratic form of 
Government and sovereignty of the country.
3.	Secular and federal character of the 
Constitution.
4. 	Demarcation of power between the 
legislature, the executive and the judiciary.
5.	The dignity of the individual secured by the 
various freedoms and basic rights in Part III 
and the mandate to build a welfare State 
contained in Part IV.
6.	The unity and the integrity of the nation."	  

81.	Sikri, CJ (at page 165-166) held that :-
"The true position is that every provision of the  
Constitution can be amended provided in the result 
the basic foundation and structure of the 
constitution remains the same.  The basic structure 
may be said to consist of the following features :-

(1) 	Supremacy of the Constitution.
(2)	Republication and Democratic form of 
Government.
(3) 	Secular character of the Constitution.
(4)	Separation of powers between the 
Legislature, the executive and the judiciary.
(5)	Federal character of the Constitution."

82.	The power of Parliament to amend the Constitution also was 
dealt with in detail and majority of the Judges held that the 
fundamental rights can be amended, altered or abridged.   The 
majority decision in Kesavananda Bharati's case (supra) 
overruled the decision in I.C. Golak Nath  Vs. State of Punjab,  
(supra).   Kesavananda Bharati indicates the extent to which 
amendment of the Constitution could be carried out and lays down 
that the legality of an amendment is no more open to attack than 
the Constitution itself.   It was held that the validity of an ordinary 
law can be questioned and when it is questioned it must be 
justified by reference to a higher law. In the case of the 
Constitution the validity is inherent and lies within itself.   The 
Constitution generates its own validity.  The validity of the 
Constitution lies in the social fact of its acceptance by the 
community.  There is a clear demarcation between an ordinary law 
made in exercise of the legislative power and the constituent law 
made in exercise of constitutional power. Therefore, the power to 
amend the Constitution is different from the power to amend 
ordinary law.  The distinction between the legislative power and 
the constitutional power is vital in a rigid or controlled Constitution 
because it is that distinction which brings in the doctrine that a law 
ultra vires the Constitution is void.  When the Parliament is 
engaged in the amending process it is not legislating, it is 
exercising a particular power bestowed upon it sui generis by the 
amending clause in the Constitution.   Sikri, CJ, held that the 
expression "amendment of this Constitution" does not enable 
Parliament to abrogate or take away fundamental rights or to 
completely change the fundamental features of the Constitution so 
as to destroy its identity. Within these limits Parliament can amend 
every article.   Shelat &amp; Grover JJ. ( at p 291) concluded that :
"Though the power to amend cannot be narrowly 
construed and extends to all the Articles it is not 
unlimited so as to include the power to abrogate or 
change the identity of the Constitution or its basic 
features."

83.	Hegde &amp; Mukherjee, JJ.  finally concluded (at p 355) that :
"The power to amend the Constitution under Article 
368 as it stood before its amendment empowered 
the Parliament by following the form and manner 
laid down in that Article, to amend each and every 
Article and each and every Part of the 
Constitution.. Though the power to amend the 
Constitution under Article 368 is a very wide power, 
it does not yet include the power to destroy or 
emasculate the basic elements or the fundamental 
features of the Constitution."

84.	Ray J. (as he then was) (at p 461) held that :-
"The Constitution is the supreme law.  Third, an 
amendment of the Constitution is an exercise of the 
constituent power.  The majority view in Golak Nath 
case is with respect wrong.  Fourth, there are no 
express limitations to the power of amendment.  
Fifth,  there are no implied and inherent limitations 
on the power of amendment.   Neither the Preamble 
nor Article 13(2) is at all a limitation on the power of 
amendment. Sixth,   the power to amend is wide 
and unlimited.  The power  to amend means the 
power to add, alter or repeal any provision of the 
Constitution.  There can be or is no distinction 
between essential and in-essential features of the 
Constitution to raise any impediment to amendment 
of alleged essential features."

85.	Palekar, J.  (at p. 632) concluded that :-
"The power and the procedure for the amendment 
of the Constitution were contained in the 
unamended Article 368.  An Amendment of the 
Constitution in accordance with the procedure 
prescribed in that Article is not a 'law' within the 
meaning of Article 13.   An amendment of the 
Constitution abridging or taking away a fundamental 
right conferred by Part III of the Constitution is not 
void as contravening the provisions of Article 13(2).  
There were no implied or inherent limitations on the 
amending power under the unamended Article 368 
in its operation over the fundamental rights.  There 
can be none after its amendment."

86.	Khanna, J. (at p. 758, 759) concluded that :-
"The power to amendment under Article 368 does 
not include power to abrogate the Constitution nor 
does it include the power to alter the basic structure 
or framework of the Constitution. Subject to the 
retention of the basic structure or framework of the 
Constitution, the power of amendment is plenary 
and includes within itself the power to amend the 
various articles of the Constitution, including those 
relating to fundamental rights as well as those which 
may be said to relate to essential features.  No part 
of a fundamental right can claim immunity from 
amendatory process by being described as the 
essence or core of that right.  The power of 
amendment would also include within itself the 
power to add, alter or repeal the various articles."  

87.	Mathew, J. (at p. 857) held that :-
"The only limitation is that the Constitution cannot 
be repealed or abrogated in the exercise of the 
power of amendment without substituting a 
mechanism by which the State is constituted and 
organized. That limitation flows from the language 
of the article itself."

88.	Beg, J. (at p. 886) held that :-
"The majority view in Golak Nath's case (supra), 
holding that Article 13 operated as a limitation upon 
the powers of Constitutional amendment found in 
Article 368, was erroneous."
He upheld the 24th Amendment and the 25th Amendment Act 
including addition of Article 31C.
89.	Dwivedi, J finally concluded that :
"The word "amendment" in Article 368 is broad 
enough to authorize the varying or abridging each 
and every provision of the Constitution, including 
Part III.  There are no inherent and implied 
limitations of the amendment power in Article 368"

90.	Finally, Chandrachud, J.  ( at p. 1000)  held that :
" The power of amendment of the Constitution 
conferred by the then Article 368 was wide and 
unfettered. It reached every part and provision of 
the Constitution."

91.		A survey of the conclusions reached by the learned Judges 
in Kesavananda Bharati's case (supra) clearly shows that the 
power of amendment was very wide and even the fundamental 
rights could be amended or altered.  It is also important to note 
that the decision in RE : The Berubari Union and Exchange of 
Enclaves, Reference under Article 143(1) of the Constitution 
of India , to the effect that preamble to the Constitution was not 
part of the Constitution was disapproved in Kesavananda 
Bharati's case (supra) and it was held that it is a part of the 
Constitution and the Preamble to the Constitution is of extreme 
importance and the Constitution should be read and interpreted in 
the light of the grand and noble visions envisaged in the Preamble.  
A close analysis of the decisions in Kesavananda Bharati's case 
(supra) shows that all the provisions of the Constitution, including 
the fundamental rights, could be amended or altered and the only 
limitation placed is that the basic structure of the Constitution shall 
not be altered.    The judgment in Kesavananda Bharati's case 
(supra) clearly indicates what is the basic structure of the 
Constitution.   It is not any single idea or principle like equality or 
any other constitutional principles that are subject to variation, but 
the principles of equality cannot be completely taken away so as to 
leave the citizens in this country in a state of lawlessness.  But the 
facets of the principle of equality could always be altered 
especially to carry out the Directive Principles of the State Policy 
envisaged in Part IV of the Constitution.  The Constitution (Ninety-
Third Amendment) Act, 2005 is to be examined in the light of the 
above position.

92.	The basic structure of the Constitution is to be taken as a larger 
principle on which the Constitution itself is framed and some of the 
illustrations given as to what constitutes the basic structure of the 
Constitution would show that they are not confined to the alteration 
or modification of any of the Fundamental Rights alone or any of 
the provisions of the Constitution.  Of course, if any of the basic 
rights enshrined in the Constitution are completely taken out, it 
may be argued that it amounts to alteration of the Basic Structure 
of the Constitution.  For example, the federal character of the 
Constitution is considered to be the basic structure of the 
Constitution. There are large number of provisions in the 
Constitution dealing with the federal character of the Constitution.  
If any one of the provisions is altered or modified, that does not 
amount to the alteration of the basic structure of the Constitution.  
Various fundamental rights are given in the Constitution dealing 
with various aspects of human life.   The Constitution itself sets out 
principles for an expanding future and is obligated to endure for 
future ages to come and consequently it has to be adapted to the 
various changes that may take place in human affairs.

93.	For determining whether a particular feature of the Constitution 
is part of the basic structure or not, it has to be examined in each 
individual case keeping in mind the scheme of the Constitution, its 
objects and purpose and the integrity of the Constitution as a 
fundamental instrument for the country's governance.  It may be 
noticed that it is not open to challenge the ordinary legislations on 
the basis of the basic structure principle.  State legislation can be 
challenged on the question whether it is violative of the provisions 
of the Constitution.  But as regards constitutional amendments, if 
any challenge is made on the basis of basic structure, it has to be 
examined based on the basic features of the Constitution.  It may 
be noticed that the majority in Kesavananda Bharati's case 
(supra) did not hold that all facets of Article 14 or any of the 
fundamental rights would form part of the basic structure of the 
Constitution.  The majority upheld the validity of the first part of 
Article 30(1)(c) which would show that the constitutional 
amendment which takes away or abridges the right to challenge 
the validity of an arbitrary law or violating a fundamental right 
under that Article would not destroy or damage the basic structure.  
Equality is a multi-coloured concept incapable of a single definition 
as is also the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g). The 
principle of equality is a delicate, vulnerable and supremely 
precious concept for our society.  It is true that it has embraced a 
critical and essential component of constitutional identity.  The 
larger principles of equality as stated in Article 14, 15 and 16 may 
be understood as an element of the "basic structure" of the 
Constitution and may not be subject to amendment, although, 
these provisions, intended to configure these rights in a particular 
way, may be changed within the constraints of the broader 
principle.  The variability of changing conditions may necessitate 
the modifications in the structure and design of these rights, but 
the transient characters of formal arrangements must reflect the 
larger purpose and principles that are the continuous and 
unalterable thread of constitutional identity.  It is not the 
introduction of significant and far-reaching change that is 
objectionable, rather it is the content of this change in so far as it 
implicates the question of constitutional identity.  

94.	The observations made by Mathew, J in Smt. Indra Gandhi Vs. 
Raj Narain  are significant in this regard:
"To be a basic structure it must be a terrestrial concept 
having its habitat within the four corners of the 
Constitution."  What constitutes basic structure is not 
like "a twinkling star up above the Constitution."  It does 
not consist of any abstract ideals to be found outside 
the provisions of the Constitution.  The Preamble no 
doubt enumerates great concepts embodying the 
ideological aspirations of the people but these concepts 
are particularised and their essential features delineated 
in the various provisions of the Constitution.  It is these 
specific provisions in the body of the Constitution which 
determine the type of democracy which the founders of 
that instrument established; the quality and nature of 
justice, political, social and economic which they aimed 
to realize, the content of liberty of thought and 
expression which they entrenched in that document and 
the scope of equality of status and of opportunity which 
they enshrined in it.   These specific provisions enacted 
in the Constitution alone can determine the basic 
structure of the Constitution.  These specific provisions, 
either separately or in combination, determine the 
content of the great concepts set out in the Preamble.  It 
is impossible to spin out any concrete concept of basic 
structure out of the gossamer concepts set out in the 
Preamble.  The specific provisions of the Constitution 
are the stuff from which the basic structure has to be 
woven".

95.	If any Constitutional amendment is made which moderately 
abridges or alters the equality principle or the principles under 
Article 19(1)(g), it cannot be said that it violates the basic structure 
of the Constitution.  If such a principle is accepted, our Constitution 
would not be able to adapt itself to the changing conditions of a 
dynamic human society.  Therefore, the plea raised by the 
Petitioners' that the present Constitutional Ninety-Third 
Amendment Act, 2005 alters the basic structure of the constitution 
is of no force.  Moreover, the interpretation of the Constitution shall 
not be in a narrow pedantic way.  The observations made by the 
Constitution Bench in Nagaraj's case (supra) at page 240 are 
relevant:

"Constitution is not an ephermal legal document 
embodying a set of legal rules for the passing hour.  
It sets out principles for an expanding future and is 
intended to endure for ages to come and 
consequently to be adapted to the various crisis of 
human affairs.  Therefore, a purposive rather than a 
strict literal approach to the interpretation should be 
adopted.  A Constitutional provision must be 
construed not in a narrow and constricted sense but 
in a wide and liberal manner so as to anticipate and 
take account of changing conditions and purposes 
so that constitutional provision does not get 
fossilized but remains flexible enough to meet the 
newly emerging problems and challenges."

96.	It has been held in many decisions that when a constitutional 
provision is interpreted, the cardinal rule is to look to the Preamble 
to the Constitution as the guiding star and the Directive Principles 
of State Policy as the 'Book of Interpretation'. The Preamble 
embodies the hopes and aspirations of the people and Directive 
Principles set out the proximate grounds in the governance of this 
country.  

97.	Therefore, we hold that the Ninety-Third Amendment to the 
Constitution does not violate the "basic structure" of the 
Constitution so far as it relates to aided educational institutions. 
Question whether reservation could be made for SCs, STs or 
SEBCs in private unaided educational institutions on the basis of 
the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment; or whether reservation 
could be given in such institutions; or whether any such legislation 
would be violative of Article 19(1)(g) or Article 14 of the 
Constitution; or whether the Ninety-Third Constitutional 
Amendment which enables the State Legislatures or Parliament to 
make such legislation - are all questions to be decided in a 
properly constituted lis between the affected parties and others 
who support such legislation.

2.   Whether Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are mutually 
contradictory, hence Article 15(5) is to be held ultra vires?

98.	The next contention raised by the petitioner's Counsel is that 
Article 15(4) and 15(5) are mutually exclusive and contradictory.  
The Counsel for the petitioner, particularly the petitioner in Writ 
Petition (C) No. 598 of 2006, submitted that Article 15(4) was a 
provision and a source of legislative power for the purpose of 
making reservation for Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled 
Tribes (STs) as well as for Socially and Educationally Backward 
Classes (SEBCs) of citizens in aided minority educational 
institutions.  And Article 15(4) was inserted after the decision of 
this Court in Champakam Dorairajan (supra) and Article 15(5) 
provides for reservation of seats for SCs, STs and SEBCs in aided 
or unaided educational institutions but expressly excludes all such 
reservation being made in minority educational institutions covered 
by Article 30(1) of the Constitution.  This, according to the 
Petitioner's learned Counsel, will lead to a situation where the 
State would not be in a position to give reservation to SCs, STs 
and SEBCs even in aided minority institutions which have got 
protection under Article 30(1) of the Constitution.  It is argued that 
in view of the express provision contained in Article 15(5), the 
State would no more be able to give the reservation and this 
according to the petitioner's Counsel would result in annulling the 
endeavour of the founding fathers and the various provisions for 
neutralizing the exclusion of SCs &amp; STs from the mainstream of 
society and development for centuries.

99.	It is argued by petitioners' learned Counsel that Article 15(4) 
and 15(5) both commence with an exclusionary clause excluding 
the operation of the rest of the Article 15, and hence would result 
in a conflict to the extent of inconsistency. According to the 
petitioners', Article 15(5) is a special provision relating to 
educational institutions and being a later amendment, it would 
prevail over Article 15(4), thus in substance and effect resulting in 
an amendment of Article 15(4) of the Constitution.  According to 
the petitioner's Counsel, "nothing in this Article" in Article 15(5) 
would include Article 15(4) also and in view of this inconsistent 
provision, Article 15(5) has to be held to be inconsistent with 15(4) 
and thus non-operative.  

100.	Both Article 15(4) and 15(5) are enabling provisions.  Article 
15(4) was introduced when the "Communal G.O." in the State of 
Madras was struck down by this Court in Champakam 
Dorairajan's case (supra).  In Unni Krishnan  (supra), this Court 
held that Article 19(1)(g) is not attracted for establishing and 
running educational institutions.  However, in T.M.A. Pai 
Foundation case, (supra), it was held that the right to establish 
and running educational institutions is an occupation within the 
meaning of Article 19(1)(g).  The scope of the decision in T.M.A. 
Pai Foundation's case was later explained in P.A. Inamdar's 
case, (supra).  It was held that as regards unaided institutions, the 
State has no control and such institutions are free to admit 
students of their own choice.  The said decision necessitated the 
enactment of the Constitution Ninety-Third Amendment Act, 2005.  
Thus, both Article 15(4) and 15(5) operate in different areas.  The 
"nothing in this Article" [mentioned at the beginning of Article 15(5)] 
would only mean that the nothing in this Article which prohibit the 
State on grounds which are mentioned in Article 15(1) alone be 
given importance.  Article 15(5) does not exclude 15(4) of the 
Constitution.  It is a well settled principle of constitutional 
interpretation that while interpreting the provisions of Constitution,  
effect shall be given to all the provisions of the Constitution and no 
provision shall be interpreted in a manner as to make any other 
provision in the Constitution inoperative or otiose.  If the  intention 
of the Parliament was to exclude Article 15(4), they could have 
very well deleted Article 15(4) of the Constitution.  Minority 
institutions are also entitled to the exercise of fundamental rights 
under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, whether they be aided or 
unaided.  But in the case of Article 15(5), the minority educational 
institutions, whether aided or unaided, are excluded from the 
purview of Article 15(5) of the Constitution.  Both, being enabling 
provisions, would operate in their own field and the validity of any 
legislation made on the basis of Article 15(4) or 15(5) have to be 
examined on the basis of provisions contained in such legislation 
or the special provision that may be made under Article 15(4) or 
15(5).  It may also be noticed that no educational institutions or 
any aggrieved party have come before us challenging the 
constitutional amendment on these grounds.  The challenge is 
made by petitioners objecting to the reservations made under Act 
5 of 2007.  Therefore, the plea that Article 15(4) and 15(5) are 
mutually contradictory and, therefore, Article 15(5) is not 
constitutionally valid cannot be accepted.  As has been held in 
N.M. Thomas case (supra) and Indra Sawhney's case (supra), 
Article 15(4) and 16(4) are not exceptions to Article 15(1) and 
Article 16(1) but independent enabling provision.  Article 15(5) also 
to be taken as an enabling provision to carry out certain 
constitutional mandate and thus it is constitutionally valid and the 
contentions raised on these grounds are rejected.

3.   Whether exclusion of minority educational institutions 
from Article 15(5) is violative of Article 14 of Constitution?

101.	Another contention raised by the petitioner's Counsel is that the 
exclusion of minority institutions under Article 15(5) itself is 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.  It was contended that the 
exclusion by itself is not severable from the rest of the provision.  
This plea also is not tenable because the minority institutions have 
been given a separate treatment in view of Article 30 of 
Constitution.  Such classification has been held to be in 
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.  The exemption 
of minority educational institutions has been allowed to conform 
Article 15(5) with the mandate of Article 30 of the Constitution.  
Moreover, both Article 15(4) and Article 15(5) are operative and 
the plea of non-severability is not applicable.

102.	 	Learned Senior Counsel Dr. Rajeev Dhavan and learned 
Counsel Shri Sushil Kumar Jain appearing for the petitioners 
contended that the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment would 
violate the equality principles enshrined in Articles 14, 19 and 21 
and thereby the "Golden Triangle" of these three Articles could be 
seriously violated.  The learned counsel also contended that 
exclusion of  minorities from the operation of Article 15(5) is also 
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.  We do not find much 
force in this contention.  It has been held that Article 15(4) and 
Article 16(4) are not exceptions to Article 15(1) and Article 16(1) 
respectively.  It may also be noted that if at all there is any violation 
of Article 14 or any other equality principle, the affected 
educational institution should have approached this Court to 
vindicate their rights.   No such petition has been filed before this 
Court.  Therefore, we hold that the exclusion of minority 
educational institutions from Article 15(5) is not violative of Article 
14 of the Constitution as the minority educational institutions, by 
themselves, are a separate class and their rights are protected by 
other constitutional provisions. 

4.  Whether the Constitutional Amendment followed the 
procedure prescribed under Article 368 of the Constitution?

103.	Another contention raised by the petitioner's Counsel is that the 
Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment is invalid as it violates the  
proviso to Article 368 of the Constitution.  According to the 
petitioner's Counsel, the procedure prescribed under the proviso to 
Article 368 was not followed in the case of the Ninety-Third 
Amendment.  According to the petitioner's Counsel, Article 15(5) of 
the Constitution interferes with the executive power of the States 
as it impliedly takes away the power of the State Government 
under Article 162 of the Constitution.

104.	This contention of the petitioner's Counsel has no force.  The 
powers of the Parliament and the State legislatures to legislate are 
provided for under Article 245-255 of the Constitution.  Under the 
proviso to Article 162, any matter with respect to which the 
legislature of the State and the Parliament have power to make 
laws, the executive power of the State shall be subject to and 
limited by the executive power expressly conferred by the 
Constitution or by any law made by Parliament upon the Union 
authorities thereof.  The Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment 
does not expressly or impliedly take away any such power 
conferred by Article 162.  It may also be noticed that by virtue of 
the 42nd Amendment to the Constitution, "education" which was 
previously in Entry No. 11 in List II was deleted and inserted in List 
III as Entry No. 25 as the field of legislation in List III.  Article 245 
will operate and by reasons of proviso to Article 162, the executive 
power of the State be subject to, limited by, the executive power 
expressly conferred by the Constitution or by any law made by 
Parliament upon the Union authorities thereof.  Subject to 
restrictions imposed under the Constitution, it has been in 
existence.  Such power of the State is not limited or curtailed by 
the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment as it does not interfere 
with the power of the State under Article 162.  The Ninety-Third   
Constitutional Amendment does not fall within the scope of proviso 
to Article 368.    Therefore, the plea raised by the petitioner's 
Counsel that the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment did not 
follow the prescribed procedure of Article 368 is not correct and 
the plea is only to be rejected. 

5.   Whether the Act 5 of 2007 is constitutionally invalid in 
view of definition of "Backward Class" and whether the 
identification of such "Backward Class" based on "caste" is 
constitutionally valid?

105.	The next important plea raised by the petitioner's Counsel is 
regarding the validity of the Act 5 of 2007.  The several contentions 
have been raised regarding the validity of the Act 5 of 2007.  The 
first contention which was raised by the petitioner's Counsel that 
this Act is ex-facie unconstitutional and is a suspect legislation and 
violative of the Article 14, 15 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.  The 
main attack against the Act was that the socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens were not properly identified and the 
delegation of power to identify the socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens to the Central Government itself is 
illegal and the delegation of such powers  by itself without laying 
down any guidelines is arbitrarily illegal.  Elaborate arguments 
were made by the petitioner's Counsel and the first and foremost 
contention was that "caste" is the sole basis on which the socially 
and educationally backward classes of citizens were determined.  
And this, according to the petitioner's Counsel, is illegal.  
Reference was made to a series of decisions of this Court on this 
issue.

106.	There is a long jurisprudential history as to whether caste can 
play any role in determining the socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens.  In Indra Sawhney's case (supra), 
which is a Nine Judge Bench decision, it was held that the "caste" 
could be a beginning point and a determinative factor in identifying 
the socially and educationally backward classes of citizens.  But 
nevertheless, a brief survey of various decisions on this question 
would give a history of the jurisprudential development on this 
subject. 

107.	Reference to the earlier decisions is necessary because serious 
doubt has been raised as to whether "caste" could be the basis for 
recognizing backwardness.  Some of the earlier decisions have 
stated that caste should not be a basis for recognizing 
backwardness and gradually  there was a shift  in the views and 
finally, in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), it was held  that caste 
could be the starting point for determining the socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizen..

108.		In Champakam Dorairajan (supra),  this Court struck down 
the classification made in the Communal G.O. of the then State of 
Madras.  The G.O. was founded on the basis of religion and castes 
and was struck down on the ground that it is opposed to the 
Constitution and is in violation of the fundamental rights  
guaranteed to the citizens.  The court held that Article 46 cannot 
override  the provisions of Article 29 (2)  because of the Directive 
Principles of State Policy which were then taken subsidiary to 
fundamental rights. This decision led to the first constitutional 
amendment by which Article 15(4) was added to the Constitution. 

109.		The next important case is M.R. Balaji &amp; Ors.   Vs.   State 
of Mysore (supra).   In this case, the State of Mysore issued an 
order that all the communities except the Brahmin community 
would fall within the definition of socially and educationally 
backward class and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and 
75% of the seats in educational institutions were reserved for 
them.  It was observed that though caste in relation to Hindus may 
be a relevant factor to consider while determining social 
backwardness  of groups or classes of citizens, it cannot be made 
the sole or dominant test.  It was held that the classes of citizens 
who are deplorably poor automatically become socially backward.  
Moreover, the occupation of citizens and the place of their 
habitation also result in social backwardness. The problem of 
determining who are socially backward classes is undoubtedly 
very complex, but the classification of  socially backward citizens 
on the basis of their caste alone is not permissible under Article 15 
(4).  Learned Senior Counsel Shri Harish Salve drew our attention 
to the various passages in the judgment.   Gajendragadkar, J.  
speaking for the majority of the Judges, said :-

"The Problem  of determining who are socially 
backward classes  is undoubtedly  very complex.  
Sociological, social  and economic considerations  
come into play in solving the problem and 
evolving  proper criteria for determining which  
classes are socially backward  is obviously a very 
difficult task; it will need an elaborate 
investigation  and collection of data and 
examining the said data in a rational and 
scientific way. That is the function of the State 
which purports to act under Article 15 (4)."

110.	 	The court drew a clear distinction between 'caste' and 'class' 
and tried to make an attempt to find a new basis for ascertaining 
social and educational backwardness in place of caste and in this 
decision  a  majority of Judges held that  in a broad way, a special 
provision  of reservation should be less than 50%; how much less 
than 50% would depend upon the relevant and prevailing 
circumstances in each case. 

111.		In R. Chitralekha's case (supra), the Government of Mysore, 
by an order defining backward classes directed that 30% of the 
seats in professional and technical colleges and institutions shall 
be reserved for them and 18% to the SCs and STs. It was laid 
down that classification of socially and educationally backward 
classes should be made on the basis of economic  condition  and 
occupation.  Suba Rao, J. (as he then was), speaking for the 
majority,  held that a classification of backward classes based on 
economic conditions and occupations is not bad in law and does 
not offend Article 15 (4). The caste of a  group of citizens  may be 
a relevant circumstance in ascertaining their social backwardness 
and though it is a relevant factor to determine social backwardness 
of a class, it cannot be the sole or dominant  test in that behalf. If, 
in a given situation, caste is excluded in ascertaining a class within  
the meaning of Article 15 (4), it does not vitiate the classification if 
it satisfies other tests. The Court observed  that various provisions 
of the Constitution  which recognized  the factual existence  of 
backwardness  in the country and which make a sincere  attempt 
to promote the welfare of the weaker sections thereof should be 
construed  to effectuate that policy and not to give weightage to 
progressive sections of the society under the false colour of caste 
to which they happen to belong.  The Court held that under no 
circumstance a 'class' can be equated  to a 'caste'  though the 
caste of an individual  or group of individuals  may be a relevant 
factor in putting him in a particular class. 

112.		Minor P. Rajendran   Vs.   State of  Madras &amp; Ors.  is 
another Constitution Bench decision wherein the order of the State 
Government providing reservation of seats for various categories  
of candidates namely  Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and  
SEBCs was challenged on various grounds. The main challenge 
was that the reservation was based entirely on consideration of 
caste and therefore it violates Article 15. Justice Wanchoo, held 
that :-
 "Now if the reservation in question had been 
based only on caste and had not taken into 
account the social and educational 
backwardness of the castes in question, it would 
be violative of Article 15 (1).  But it must not be 
forgotten that a caste is also a class of citizens 
and if the caste as a whole  is socially and 
educationally backward  reservation can be made 
in favour of such a caste on the ground that it is a 
socially and educationally backward class of 
citizens  within the meaning of Article 15 (4). 
Reference in this connection may be made to the 
observations of this Court in M.R. Balaji v. State 
of Mysore to the effect that it was not irrelevant to 
consider the caste of a class of citizens in 
determining their social and educational 
backwardness.  It was further observed that 
though the caste of a class of citizens may be 
relevant its importance should not be 
exaggerated; and if classification of backward 
classes of citizens was based solely on the caste 
of the citizen, it might be open to objection. 
					(emphasis supplied)


113.	It may be noticed that the list prepared by the State showed 
certain castes, and members of those castes according to the 
State were really classes of socially and educationally backward  
citizens.  It was observed in that case that the petitioners therein 
did not make any attempt to show that any caste mentioned in the 
list of educationally and socially backward classes of citizens was 
not educationally and socially backward  and the list based on 
caste was upheld by the Constitution Bench and held to be not 
violative of Article 15(1).

114.	In Triloki Nath Tiku Vs. State of J &amp; K (I) ,  50%  of the 
gazetted posts were to be filled up by promotion in favour of the 
Muslims of Jammu &amp; Kashmir. The Court held that inadequate 
representation in State services would  not be decisive for 
determining the backwardness of a section. The Court accordingly 
gave directions for collecting further material relevant to the 
subject. And in a subsequent decision, Triloki Nath(II) (supra), the 
court observed that the expression "backward class" is not used as 
synonymous with "backward caste".

115.	In Minor A. Peerikaruppan   Vs.   State of Tamil Nadu &amp; Ors.  
(supra), this Court made reference to the earlier decisions 
especially in M.R. Balaji case (supra) and R. Chitralekha case 
(supra).  Hegde, J., at paragraph 29, observed :-

"There is no gainsaying the fact that there are 
numerous castes in this country which are socially 
and educationally backward.  To ignore their 
existence is to ignore the facts of life.  Hence we 
are unable  to uphold the contention that the 
impugned reservation  is not in accordance  with 
Article 15 (4).  But all the same the Government 
should not proceed on the basis  that once a class 
is considered  as a backward class it  should 
continue to be backward class for all times.  Such 
an approach would defeat the very purpose of the 
reservation because once  a class reaches a stage 
of progress  which some modern writers call as 
take off stage then competition is necessary for 
their future progress.  The Government should 
always keep under review the question  of 
reservation of seats and only the classes which 
are really socially and educationally backward 
should be allowed to have the benefit of 
reservation."  

116.		The learned Counsel for the petitioners also made reference 
to  State of Uttar Pradesh &amp; Ors.   Vs.  Pradip Tandon &amp; Ors.   
wherein  Chief Justice Ray observed  at paragraph 14 :-

"Socially and educationally backward classes  
of citizens in Article 15 (4)  could not be 
equated  with castes.  In M.R. Balaji v. State 
of Mysore  and State of A.P. v. Sagar this 
Court held that classification of backwardness 
on the basis of castes would violate both 
Articles 15 (1) and 15 (4)."

117.		Another important decision is that of State of Kerala &amp; Anr.   
Vs N.M. Thomas &amp; Ors.  (supra), wherein the constitutional 
validity of Rule 13-AA of the Kerala State &amp; Subordinate Services 
Rules was under challenge. The Rule gave exemption of 2 years 
to members belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
in services, from passing the departmental test.  The High Court of 
Kerala struck down the Rule and in an appeal by the State the 
question of reservation was elaborately considered. Mathew, J. in 
his concurring judgment, held that in order to give equality of 
opportunity  for employment  to the members of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled  Tribes, it is necessary to take note of their social, 
educational and economic backwardness.  Not only is the Directive 
Principle  embodied in Article 46 binding on the law-makers as 
ordinarily understood, but it should equally inform and illuminate 
the approach  of the court when it makes a decision, as the court  
is also a  "State"  within the meaning of Article 12 and makes law 
even though interstitially. Existence  of equality  depends  not 
merely on the absence of disabilities  but on the presence of 
disabilities.  To achieve  it,  differential  treatment of persons who 
are unequal is permissible.  This is what is styled as compensatory 
discrimination or affirmative  action. 

118.		In K.C. Vasanth Kumar   Vs.   State of Karnataka (supra) 
the question of identifying socially and educationally backward 
class  came up for consideration.  Desai, J., elaborately 
considered this question in paragraph 20 and  observed  :- 

"By its existence over thousands of years, more 
or less it was assumed that caste should be the 
criterion for determining social and educational 
backwardness.  In other words, it was said, look 
at the caste, its traditional functions, its position 
in relation to upper  castes by the standard of 
purity and pollution, pure and not so pure 
occupation,  once these  questions are 
satisfactorily answered without  anything more, 
those who belong to that caste must be labeled 
socially and educationally backward.  This over-
simplified approach ignored a very realistic 
situation existing in each caste that in every 
such caste whose members claim to be socially 
and educationally backward, had an 
economically well-placed segments."

119.	Chinnappa Reddy, J., also dealt with the question elaborately 
and observed :- 

"However we look at the question of 
'backwardness',  whether from  the angle of 
class, status or power, we find  the economic 
factor at the bottom of it all and we find poverty, 
the culprit-cause  and the dominant 
characteristic. Poverty, the economic factor 
brands all backwardness just as the erect 
posture brands the homosapiens and 
distinguishes  him from all other animals, in the 
eyes of the beholder from Mars.  But, whether 
his racial stock is Caucasian, Mongoloid, 
Negroid, etc.,  further investigation will have to 
be made.  So too the further question of social 
and educational  backwardness requires  
further scrutiny.  In India, the matter is further 
aggravated, complicated  and pitilessly 
tyrannized by the ubiquitous  caste system, a 
unique and devastating system of gradation and 
degradation which has divided the entire Indian 
and particularly  Hindu society horizontally into 
such distinct  layers as to be destructive of 
mobility, a system which has penetrated and 
corrupted the mind and soul of every Indian 
citizen.  It is a notorious fact that there is an 
upper crust of rural society  consisting  of the 
superior castes, generally the priestly, the 
landlord and the merchant castes, there is a 
bottom strata consisting of the 'out-castes' of 
Indian Rural Society, namely the Scheduled 
Castes, and, in between the highest and the 
lowest, there are large segments of population 
who because of the low gradation of the caste 
to which they belong in the rural society 
hierarchy, because of the humble occupation 
which they pursue, because of their poverty and 
ignorance are also condemned to 
backwardness, social and educational, 
backwardness which prevents them from 
competing on equal terms to catch up with the 
upper crust. "

120.	Reference was also made to other decisions, namely, State of 
Andhra Pradesh &amp; Anr.   Vs.  P. Sagar  and  T. Devadasan  Vs.   
The Union of India &amp; Anr. .  The earlier decisions took the view 
that caste shall not be a basis for determining the socially and 
educationally backward class of citizens.  But from the later 
decisions, we find a slight shift in the approach of the court.  If the 
classification of SEBCs is done exclusively on the basis of caste, it 
would fly in the face of Article 15(1) of the Constitution as it 
expressly prohibits any discrimination on the grounds of religion, 
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.  After a careful 
examination of the various previous decisions of this Court, in  
Indra Sawhney   (supra),  while examining the validity of the 
'Backward Class List' prepared by the Mandal Commisson, Jeevan 
Reddy. J., speaking for the majority, held as under:-

"705. During the years 1968 to 1971, this Court had to 
consider the validity of identification of backward 
classes made by Madras and Andhra Pradesh 
Governments.  P. Rajendran v. State of Madras 3 13 
related to specification of socially and educationally 
backward classes with reference to castes.  The 
question was whether such an identification infringes 
Article 15.  Wanchoo, CJ, speaking for the Constitution 
Bench dealt with the contention in the following words: 
(SCR p. 790-91)

"The contention is that the list of socially and 
educationally backward classes for whom reservation 
is made under Rule 5 is nothing but a list of certain 
castes.  Therefore, reservation in favour of certain 
castes based only on caste considerations violates 
Article 15(1), which prohibits discrimination on the 
ground of caste only.  Now if the reservation in 
question had been based only on caste and had not 
taken into account the social and educational 
backwardness of the caste in question, it would be 
violative of Article 15(1).  But it must not be forgotten 
that a caste is also a class of citizens and if the caste 
as a whole is socially and educationally backward 
reservation can be made in favour of such a caste on 
the ground that is a socially and educationally 
backward class of citizens within the meaning of Article 
15(4) .. .. It is true that in the present cases the list of 
socially and educationally backward classes has been 
specified by caste.  But that does not necessarily mean 
that caste was the sole consideration and that persons 
belonging to these castes are also not a class of 
socially and educationally backward citizens .. .. As it 
was found that members of these castes as a whole 
were educationally and socially backward, the list 
which had been coming on from as far back as 1906 
was finally adopted for purposes of Article 15(4) .. ..

In view however of the explanation given by the State 
of Madras, which has not been controverted by any 
rejoinder, it must be accepted that though the list 
shows certain castes, the members of those castes are 
really classes of educationally and socially backward 
citizens.  No attempt was made on behalf of the 
petitioners/appellant to show that any caste mentioned 
in this list was not educationally and socially backward.  
In this state of the pleadings, we must come to the 
conclusion that though the list is prepared caste-wise, 
the castes included therein are as a whole 
educationally and socially backward and therefore the 
list is not violative of Article 15.  The challenge to Rule 
5 must therefore fail."

121.	In that decision it was further held that "Backward Class" in 
Article 16(4) cannot be read as "Backward Caste".  And under 
Article 340 of the Constitution, the President may by order appoint 
a Commission consisting of such persons as he thinks fit to 
investigate the conditions of socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens within the territory of India and the difficulties 
under which they labour and to make recommendations as to the 
steps that should be taken by the Union or any State to remove the 
difficulties and to improve their condition.  The object of this 
provision is to empower the President to appoint a Commission to 
ascertain the difficulties and problems of socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens.  And in Indra Sawhney's case 
(supra), the majority held that the ideal and wise method would be 
to mark out various occupations which on the lower level in many 
cases amongst Hindus would be their caste itself and find out their 
social acceptability and educational standard, weigh them in the 
balance of economic conditions and, the result would be backward 
class of citizens needing a genuine protective umbrella.  And after 
having adopted occupation as the starting point, the next point 
should be to ascertain their social acceptability.  A person carrying 
on scavenging becomes an untouchable whereas others who were 
as law in the social strata as untouchables became depressed.  
The Court has cautioned that the backwardness should be 
traditional.  Mere educational or social backwardness would not 
have been sufficient as it would enlarge the field thus frustrating 
the very purpose of the constitutional goal.  It was pointed out that 
after applying these tests, the economic criteria or the means-test 
should be applied since poverty is the prime cause of all 
backwardness as it generates social and educational 
backwardness.

122.		The learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that caste 
cannot be used even as one of the criteria for identifying the 
SEBCs as many persons have shifted their traditional occupations 
and have become doctors, engineers and lawyers.  But these are 
only a few cases and even such persons continue to suffer social 
segregation based on caste.  In Pradip Tandon's case (supra)  it 
was held at para 17 that:

 "The expression 'classes of citizens' indicates a 
homogenous section of the people who are grouped 
together because of certain likenesses and common 
traits and who are identifiable by some common 
attributes.  The homogeneity of the class of citizens is 
social and educational backwardness.  Neither caste 
nor religion nor place of birth will be the uniform 
element of common attributes to make them a class of 
citizens."

123.	The above statement is not fully correct.  Caste plays an 
important role in determining the backwardness of the individual.  
In society, social status and standing depend upon the nature of 
the occupation followed.  In paragraph 779 of Indra Sawhney's 
case, it is stated:

"Lowlier  the occupation, lowlier the social standing of 
the class in the graded hierarchy.  In rural India, 
occupation-caste nexus is true even today.  A few 
members may have gone to cities or even abroad but 
when they return  they do, barring a few exceptions  
they go into the same fold again.  It does not matter if 
he has earned money.  He may not follow that particular 
occupation.  Still, the label remains.  His identity is not 
changed for the purpose of marriage, death and all 
other social functions, it is his social class  the caste  
that is relevant."

124.		"Caste" is often used interchangeably with "class" and can be 
called as the basic unit in social stratification.  The most 
characteristic thing about a caste group is its autonomy in caste 
related matters.  One of the universal codes enforced by all castes 
is the requirement of endogamy.  Other rules have to do with the 
regulations pertaining to religious purity or cleanliness.  Sometimes 
it restricts occupational choices as well.  It is not necessary that 
these rules be enforced in particular classes as well, and as such a 
"class" may be distinguished from the broader realm of "caste" on 
these grounds.  Castes were often rated, on a purity scale, and not 
on a social scale.   

125.	 	The observations made by Venkataramaiah J. in K.C. 
Vasanth Kumar case  are relevant in this regard :

"We are aware of the meanings of the words caste, 
race, or tribe or religious minorities in India.  A caste 
is an association of families which practise the 
custom of endogamy i.e. which permits marriages 
amongst the members belonging to such families 
only. Caste rules prohibit its members from 
marrying outside their caste.  There are sub-groups 
amongst the castes which sometimes inter-marry 
and sometimes do not.  A caste is based on various 
factors, sometimes it may be a class, a race or a 
racial unit.  A caste has nothing to do with wealth.  
The caste of a person is governed by his birth in a 
family. Certain ideas of ceremonial purity are 
peculiar to each caste.  Sometimes caste practices 
even led to segregation of same castes in the 
villages.  Even the choice of occupation of members 
of castes was predetermined in many cases, and 
the members of a particular caste were prohibited 
from engaging themselves in other types of callings, 
professions or occupations. Certain occupations 
were considered to be degrading or impure.  A 
certain amount of rigidity developed in several 
matters and many who belonged to castes which 
were lower in social order were made to suffer 
many restrictions, privations and humiliations.  
Untouchability was practised against members 
belonging to certain castes. Inter-dining was 
prohibited in some cases.  None of these rules 
governing a caste had anything to do with either the 
individual merit of a person or his capacity.  The 
wealth owned by him would not save him from 
many social discriminations practised by members 
belonging to higher castes.  Children who grew in 
this caste ridden atmosphere naturally suffered from 
many social disadvantages apart from the denial of 
opportunity to live in the same kind of environment 
in which persons of higher castes lived.  Many 
social reformers have tried in the last two centuries 
to remove the stigma of caste from which people 
born in lower castes were suffering.  Many laws 
were also passed prohibiting some of the inhuman 
caste practices." (p. 110)


126.		Rivers, the leading anthropologist, criticizes the use of the 
terms "caste" and "class" as synonyms .  However, many others, 
such as Lowie  and Kimball Young , use these terms as though 
they were identical.					

127.		Very common is the use of the word caste to indicate 
hereditary status.  Cecil Clare North ,  the noted sociologist, 
accepts the point of view that degrees of rigidity mark the 
difference between class and caste systems.  His definition reads: 

"A group in which status, occupation, and culture 
have become hereditary is known as a caste.  As a 
matter of fact, however, the distinction between a 
society based upon caste and one in which open 
classes prevail is simply one of degree."

128.		North concludes by saying that the term "caste" applies to 
classes that have become fixed, and that all such classes tend to 
become castes. 

129.		MacIver , another leading authority in the field of social 
class theory, also identifies caste with hereditary status.  He 
attempts to tie his interpretation with the situation in India, a 
procedure not often followed by the other sociologists.  He writes 
thus, 

"Caste as unchangeable status: -- The feudal order 
approximated to a caste system.  When status is 
wholly predetermined, so that men are born to their 
lot in life without hope of changing it, then class 
takes the extreme form of caste.  This is the 
situation in Hindu society.  'Every Hindu necessarily 
belongs to the caste of his parents, and in that caste 
he inevitably remains.  No accumulation of wealth 
and no exercise of talents can alter his caste status; 
and marriage outside his caste is prohibited or 
severely discouraged.'  Caste is a complete barrier 
to the mobility of class."

130.		Therefore, a class always enjoys certain privileges or at least 
certain advantages over others in society.  When it is more or less 
rigorously closed, or enjoys hereditary privileges, it is called a 
"caste".

131.		However, there are other sociologists who are of the opinion 
that the Caste system has a hereditary function also.  Charles 
Horton Cooley  opines that:

 "if the transmission of function from father to son 
has become established, a caste spirit, a sentiment 
in favour of such transmission and opposed to the 
passage from one class to another, may arise and 
be shared even by the unprivileged classes.  The 
individual then thinks of himself and his family as 
identified with his caste"

132.		Therefore, according to the early sociological theories, the 
term "caste" has been used to mean "class", hereditary or rigid 
status, and hereditary occupation.

133.		The Mysore Census of 1901   is quoted, in this connection, 
as follows:

"In any one of the linguistic divisions of India there 
are as many as two hundred castes which can be 
grouped in classes whose gradation is largely 
acknowledged by all. But the order of social 
precedence amongst the individual castes of any 
class cannot be made definite, because not only is 
there no ungrudging acceptance of such rank but 
also the ideas of the people on this point are very 
nebulous and uncertain.  The following observations 
vividly bring out this state of things."

...Excepting the Brahmin at one end and the 
admittedly degraded castes like the Holeyas at the 
other, the members of a large proportion of the 
immediate castes think or profess to think that their 
caste is better than their neighbours, and should be 
ranked accordingly."

134.		On the other hand, it is possible that within a caste group 
there is a marked inequality of status, opportunity, or social 
standing  which then defines the "class" within that particular 
"caste" system.  For example, all the Brahmins are not engaged in 
highly respectable employment, nor are all very wealthy.  It may 
even be that some Brahmins may be servants of members of a 
lower caste, or it may also be so that the personal servant of a rich 
Brahmin may be a poor Brahmin.

135.		Hence, there is every reason to believe that within a single 
caste group there are some classes or groups of people to whom 
good fortune or perseverance has brought more dignity, social 
influence and social esteem than it has to others.

136.		In India, caste, in a socio-organizational manner would mean 
that it is not characterized merely by the physical or occupational 
characteristics of the individuals who make it up; rather, it is 
characterized by its codes and its close-knit social controls.  In the 
case of classes, however, there may not exist such close-knit unit 
social controls, and there may exist great disparity in occupational 
characteristics.

137.		A social class is therefore a homogeneous unit, from the 
point of view of status and mutual recognition; whereas a caste is 
a homogeneous unit from the point of view of common ancestry, 
religious rites and strict organizational control.  Thus the manner in 
which the caste is closed both in the organizational and biological 
sense causes it to differ from social class.  Moreover, its emphasis 
upon ritual and regulations pertaining to cleanliness and purity 
differs radically from the secular nature and informality of social 
class rules.  In a social class, the exclusiveness would be based 
primarily on status.  Social classes divide homogeneous 
populations into layers of prestige and esteem, and the members 
of each layer are able to circulate freely with it.

138.	In a caste, however, the social distance between members is 
due to the fact that they belong to entirely different organizations. It 
may be said, therefore, that a caste is a horizontal division and a 
class, a vertical division.

139.	The Solicitor General, Mr. G.E. Vahanvati, pointed out that for 
the purpose of reservation under Article 16(4) of the Constitution, 
the Central List has been in operation for the past 14 years and not 
a single person has challenged any inclusion in the Central List as 
void or illegal.  

140.	It was pointed out that the National Commission for the 
Backward Classes and the State Commission for Backward 
Classes have prepared a list based on elaborate guidelines and 
these guidelines have been framed after studying the 
criteria/indicators framed by the Mandal Commission and the 
Commissions set up in the past by different State Governments.  
Various Commissions held  public hearings at various places and 
the National Commission held 236 public hearings before it 
finalized the list.   It is also pointed out that during the period of its 
functioning, the National Commission had recommended 297 
requests for inclusion and at the same time rejected 288 requests 
for inclusion of the main castes.   It is further pointed out that the 
Commission took into consideration detailed data with regard to 
social, educational  and economic criteria.  The Commission has 
also looked into whether there has been any improvement or 
deterioration in the condition of the caste or community being 
considered for inclusion during the past twenty years. 

141.	It is pointed out that an elaborate questionnaire was prepared 
by the Commission and the answers in this questionnaire were 
considered in detail for inclusion/rejection in the list.  It is clear that 
the lists of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens 
are being prepared not solely on the basis of the caste and if caste 
and other considerations are taken into account for determining 
backwardness, it cannot be said that it would be violative of Article 
15(1) of the Constitution.   

142.	We hold that the determination of SEBCs is done not solely 
based on caste and hence, the identification of SEBCs is not 
violative of Article 15(1) of the Constitution.

6.   Whether Creamy Layer is to be excluded from SEBCs?

143.	The SEBCs have been identified by applying various criteria.   
Though for the purpose of convenience, the list is based on caste, 
it cannot be said that 'Backward Class' has been identified solely 
on the basis of caste.  All the castes which suffered the social and 
educational backwardness have been included in the list.  
Therefore, it is not violative of Article 15(1).  The only possible 
objection that could be agitated is that in many of the castes 
included in this list, there may be an affluent section (Creamy 
Layer) which cannot be included in the list of SEBCs.  

144.	When socially and educationally backward classes are 
determined by giving importance to caste, it shall not be forgotten 
that a segment of that caste is economically advanced and they do 
not require the protection of reservation.  It was argued on behalf 
of the petitioners that the principle of 'Creamy Layer' should be 
strictly applied to SEBCs while giving affirmative action and the 
principles of exclusion of 'Creamy Layer' applied in Indra 
Sawhney's case should be equally applied to any of the 
legislations that may be passed as per Article 15(5) of the 
Constitution.  The Counsel for the petitioners submitted that 
SEBCs have been defined under section 2 (g) of the Act and the 
Central Government has been delegated with the power to 
determine Other Backward Classes. The Counsel for the 
petitioners have pointed out that the definition given in section 2(g) 
of the Act should be judicially interpreted.  That the backward class 
so stated therein should mean to exclude the 'Creamy Layer'.  The 
learned Senior Counsel appearing for Pattali Makkal Katchi (PMK) 
stated that exclusion of 'Creamy Layer' shall not apply for 
reservation in educational institutions.  He pointed out that in case 
the 'creamy layer' is excluded, the other members of the backward 
class community would not be in a position to avail the benefit of 
reservation and the fee structure in many of these centrally 
administered institutions is exorbitantly high and the ordinary 
citizen would not be in a position to afford the payment of fees and 
thus the very purpose of the reservation would be frustrated.   

145.	According to the learned Counsel for the respondents, the 
creamy layer elimination will only perpetuate caste inequalities.  It 
would enable the advanced castes to eliminate any challenge or 
competition to their leadership in the professions and services and 
that they will gain by eliminating all possible beneficiaries of 
reservation in the name of creamy layer especially in the 
institutions of higher learning.   It was argued that  the analogy of 
Creamy Layer applied in reservations to jobs cannot be applied in 
reservations to educational institutions of higher learning.  The 
position of a student getting admission to an institution of higher 
learning is totally different and can never be compared to that of 
backward class person to get a job by virtue of reservation.  The 
study in any educational institution of higher learning is very 
expensive and the non-creamy layer backward class parent cannot 
afford his son or his daughter incurring such a huge expenditure.  
Eliminating them from the Creamy Layer will frustrate the very 
object of providing reservation. Therefore, it is wholly impracticable 
and highly counter productive to import the policy of Creamy Layer 
for reservation in these institutions.   And according to the learned 
Counsel there is a difference between services and education and 
that under the purview of Act 5 of 2007, around 3 lakh seats would 
be filled up every year.  Whereas the jobs are limited and they will 
not become vacant every year.    

146.	The learned Counsel pointed out that grouping of all castes 
together may enable a less backward caste among the backward 
classes to corner more seats than it deserves.  It is also possible 
that more backward classes cannot afford to compete with the less 
backward classes.  The only way to solve the said problem is by 
categorization of Backward Classes and sub classifying them so 
as to ensure that under each category only similarly circumstanced 
castes are grouped together.  The categorization of backward 
class has successfully worked in State of Tamil Nadu where most 
backward class is provided 20% reservation and the most 
backward castes and denotified tribes are grouped together and 
the backward classes are provided 30% reservation.  In the State 
of Karnataka, backward classes are divided into 5 categories and 
separate reservations have been provided.  And in the State of 
Andhra Pradesh, Backward Classes have been divided into 4 
divisions and separate percentage of reservation has been 
provided.

147.	As noticed earlier, determination of backward class cannot be 
exclusively based on caste.  Poverty, social backwardness, 
economic backwardness, all are criteria for determination of 
backwardness.  It has been noticed in Indra Sawhney's case that 
among the backward class, a section of the backward class is a 
member of the affluent section of society.  They do not deserve 
any sort of reservation for further progress in life.  They are socially 
and educationally advanced enough to compete for the general 
seats along with other candidates.

148.	In Indra Sawhney's case (supra)  Jeevan Reddy, J.,  has 
observed  :

"In our opinion, it is not a question of permissibility 
or desirability of such test but one of proper and 
more appropriate identification of a class  a 
backward class.  The very concept of a class 
denotes a number of persons having certain 
common traits which distinguish them from the 
others. In a backward class under clause (4) of 
Article 16, if the connecting link is the social 
backwardness, it should broadly be the same in a 
given class.  If some of the members are far too 
advanced socially (which in the context, necessarily 
means economically and, may also mean 
educationally) the connecting thread between them 
and the remaining class snaps.  They would be 
misfits in the class.  After excluding them alone, 
would the class be a compact class.  In fact, such 
exclusion benefits the truly backward." (p. 724)


149.	 It is to be understood that  "creamy layer"  principle is 
introduced merely to exclude a section of a particular caste on the 
ground that they are economically advanced or educationally 
forward.  They are excluded because unless this segment of caste 
is excluded from that caste group, there cannot be proper 
identification of the backward class.  If the "Creamy Layer" 
principle is not applied,  it could easily be said that all the castes 
that have been included among the socially and educationally 
backward classes have been included exclusively on the basis of 
caste.  Identification of SEBC for the purpose of either Article 
15(4), 15(5) or 16(4) solely on the basis of caste is expressly 
prohibited by various decisions of this Court and it is also against 
Article 15(1) and Article 16(1) of the Constitution.  To fulfil the 
conditions and to find out truly what is socially and educationally 
backward class, the exclusion of "creamy layer" is essential.

150.	It may be noted that the "creamy layer" principle is applied not 
as a general principle of reservation. It is applied for the purpose of 
identifying the socially and educationally backward class. One of 
the main criteria for determining the SEBC is poverty.  If that be so, 
the principle of exclusion of "creamy layer" is necessary.  
Moreover, the majority in Indra Sawhney's case upheld the 
exclusion of "creamy layer" for the purpose of reservation in Article 
16(4).  Therefore, we are bound by the larger Bench decision of 
this Court in Indra Sawhney's case, and it cannot be said that the 
"creamy layer" principle cannot be applied for identifying SEBCs.  
Moreover, Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are designed to provide 
opportunities in education thereby raising educational, social and 
economical levels of those who are lagging behind and once this 
progress is achieved by this section, any legislation passed 
thereunder should be deemed to have served its purpose. By 
excluding those who have already attained economic well being or 
educational advancement, the special benefits provided under 
these clauses cannot be further extended to them and,  if done so, 
it would be unreasonable,  discriminatory or arbitrary,  resulting  in 
reverse discrimination. 

151.	Sawant, J. also made observation in Indra Sawhney's case to 
ensure removal of 'creamy layer'.  He observed:-

".at least some individuals and families in the 
backward classes ---- gaining sufficient means to 
develop their capacities to compete with others in 
every field.... Legally, therefore, they are not entitled 
to be any longer called as part of the backward 
classes whatever their original birth mark --- to 
continue to confer upon such advanced sections 
from the backward classes the special benefits, 
would amount to treating equals unequally violating 
the equality provisions of the Constitution.  
Secondly, to rank them with the rest of the 
backward classes would equally violate the right to 
equality of the rest in those classes, since it would 
amount to treating the unequals equally. It will 
lead to perverting the objectives of the special 
constitutional provisions since the forwards among 
the backward classes will thereby be enabled to tap 
up all the special benefits to the exclusion and to 
the cost of the rest in those classes, thus keeping 
the rest in perpetual backwardness."

152.		All these reasonings are equally applicable to the reservation 
or any special action contemplated under Article 15(5).  Therefore, 
we are unable to agree with the contention raised by the 
respondent's learned Counsel that if 'creamy layer' is excluded, 
there may be practically no representation for a particular 
backward class in educational institutions because the remaining 
members, namely, the non-creamy layer, may not have risen to 
the level or standard necessary to qualify to get admission even 
within the reserved quota.  If the creamy layer is not excluded, the 
identification of SEBC will not be complete and any SEBC without 
the exclusion of 'creamy layer' may not be in accordance with 
Article 15(1) of the Constitution.

7.   What should be the para-meters for determining the 
"creamy layer" group ?

153.	 	After the decision in Indra Sawhney's case (supra), the 
Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and 
Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) issued an Office 
Memorandum dated 08.09.1993  providing for 27% reservation for 
Other Backward Classes.  The Memorandum reads as follows :-

"OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject : Reservation for Other Backward Classes in Civil 
Posts and Services Under the Government of India ---
regarding
-----------
	The undersigned is directed to refer to this 
Department's OM No. 36012/31/90-Estt. (SCT), dated the 
13th August, 1990 and 25th September, 1991 regarding 
reservation for Socially and Educationally Backward Classes 
in Civil Posts and Services under the Government of India 
and to say that following the Supreme Court judgment in the 
Indra Sawhney  vs.  Union of India (Writ Petition (Civil) No. 
930 of 1990) the Government of India appointed an Expert 
Committee to recommend the criteria for exclusion of the 
socially advanced persons/sections from the benefits of 
reservations for Other Backward Classes in Civil Posts and 
Services under the Government of India.

2.	Consequent to the consideration of the Expert 
Committee's recommendations this Department's Office 
Memorandum No. 36012/31/90-Estt. (SCT), dated 13.8.1990 
referred to in para (1) above is hereby modified to provide as 
follows :

	(a) 27% (twenty-seven per cent) of the vacancies in 
Civil Posts and Services under the Government of 
India, to be filled through direct recruitment, shall be 
reserved for the Other Backward Classes.  Detailed 
instructions relating to the procedure to be followed 
for enforcing reservation will be issued separately.

(b)   			*                *              *
(c) (i) The aforesaid reservation shall not apply to 
persons/sections mentioned in Column 3 of the 
Schedule to this office memorandum.
(ii) The rule of exclusion will not apply to persons 
working as artisans or engaged in hereditary 
occupations, callings.  A list of such occupations, 
callings will be issued separately by the Ministry of 
Welfare.
(d)-(e)	*		*		*
		*		*		*
3.	                              SCHEDULE

	Description of category		To whom rule of exclusion
 						will apply


1
2
3

     I.
CONSTITUTIONAL 
POSTS
Son(s) and daughter(s) of
(a) President of India;
(b) Vice-President of India;
(c.) Judges of the Supreme Court 
and of the High Courts;
(d) Chairman &amp; Members of UPSC 
and of the State Public Service 
Commission; Chief Election 
Commissioner; Comptroller and 
Auditor General of India;
(e) persons holding constitutional 
positions of like nature.

II.

SERVICE 
CATEGORY

Son(s) and daughter(s) of

A.

Group A/Class I 
Officers of the All 
India Central and 
State Services 
(Direct Recruits)

(a) parents, both of whom are 
Class I Officers;
(b) parents, either of whom is a 
Class I officer;
(c.) parents, both of whom are 
Class I Officers, but one of them 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation;
(d) parents, either of whom is a 
Class I officer and such parent dies 
or suffers permanent incapacitation 
and before such death or such 
incapacitation has had the benefit 
of employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank, etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years;
(e) parents, both of whom are 
Class I officers die or suffer 
permanent incapacitation and 
before such death or such 
incapacitation of the both, either of 
them has had the benefit of 
employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank, etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years.

Provided that the rule of exclusion 
shall not apply in the following 
cases :
(a)	Son(s) and 
daughter(s) of parents either of 
whom or both of whom are class I 
officers and such parent(s) dies/die 
or suffer permanent incapacitation;
(b)	A lady belonging 
to OBC category has got married 
to a Class I officer, and may herself 
like to apply for a job.

B.

Group B/Class II 
officers of the 
Central and State 
Services (Direct 
Recruitment)

Son(s) and daughter(s) of
(a) Parents both of whom are 
Class II officers;
(b) parents of whom only the 
husband is a Class II officer and he 
get into Class I at the age of 40 or 
earlier;
(c) parents, both of whom are 
Class II officers and one of them 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation and either one of 
them has had the benefit of 
employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years before such death or 
permanent incapacitation;
(d) parents of whom the husband is 
a Class I officer (direct recruit or 
pre-forty promoted) and the wife is 
a Class II officer and the wife dies; 
or suffers permanent 
incapacitation; and 
(e) parents, of whom the wife is a 
Class I officer (direct recruit or pre-
forty promoted) and the husband is 
a Class II officer and the husband 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation:

Provided that the rule of exclusion 
shall not apply in the following 
cases:

               Son(s) and daughter(s) of 

(a)	parents both of whom are Class 
II officers and one of them dies or 
suffers permanent incapacitation;
(b)	parents, both of whom are 
Class II officers and both of them 
die or suffer permanent 
incapacitation, even though either 
of them has had the benefit of 
employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years before their death or 
permanent incapacitation.

C.
Employees in 
Public Sector 
Undertakings etc.
The criteria enumerated in A and B 
above in this category will apply 
mutatis mutandis to officers holding 
equivalent or comparable posts in 
PSUs, Banks, Insurance 
Organisations, Universities, etc. 
and also to equivalent or 
comparable posts and positions 
under private employment, pending 
the evaluation of the posts on 
equivalent or comparable basis in 
these institutions, the criteria 
specified in Category VI below will 
apply to the officers in these 
institutions.

III. ARMED 
FORCES 
INCLUDING 
PARAMILITARY 
FORCES (Persons 
holding civil posts 
are not included)

Son(s) and daughter(s) of parents 
either or both of whom is or are in 
the rank of Colonel and above in 
the Army and to equivalent posts in 
the Navy and the Air Force and the 
Paramilitary Forces:

Provided that: 

(i)	If the wife of an Armed 
Forces officer is herself in the 
Armed Forces (i.e. the category 
under consideration) the rule of 
exclusion will apply only when she 
herself has reached the rank of 
Colonel;
(ii)	The service ranks below 
Colonel of husband and wife shall 
not be clubbed together;
(iii)	If the wife of an officer in 
the Armed Forces is in civil 
employment, this will not be taken 
into account for applying the rule of 
exclusion unless she falls in the 
service category under Item No. II 
in which case the criteria and 
conditions enumerated therein will 
apply to her independently.

IV. 
PROFESSIONAL 
CLASS AND 
THOSE 
ENGAGED IN 
TRADE AND 
INDUSTRY

(i) Persons 
engaged in 
profession as a 
doctor, lawyer, 
chartered  
accountant, 
Income Tax 
consultant, 
financial or 
management 
consultant, dental 
surgeon, engineer, 
architect, 
computer 
specialist, film 
artists and other 
film professional, 
author, playwright, 
sports  persons, 
sports 
professional, 
media professional 
or any other 
vocations of like 
status.

(ii) Persons 
engaged in trade, 
business and 
industry.

Criteria specified against Category 
VI will apply


























Criteria specified against Category 
VI will apply-
Explanation:
(i)	Where the husband is in 
same profession and the wife is in 
a Class II or lower grade 
employment, the income/wealth 
test will apply only on the basis of 
the husband's income;
(ii)	If the wife is in any 
profession and the husband is in 
employment in a Class II or lower 
rank post, then the income/wealth 
criterion will apply only on the basis 
of the wife's income and the 
husband's income will not be 
clubbed with it. 

V. PROPERTY 
OWNERS

A. Agricultural 
holdings

























































B. Plantations

(i) Coffee, tea, 
rubber etc.

(ii) Mango, citrus, 
apple plantations, 
etc.

C. Vacant land 
and/or buildings, in 
urban areas or 
urban 
agglomerations




Son(s) and daughter(s) of persons 
belonging to a family (father, 
mother and minor children) which 
owns only irrigated land which is 
equal to or more than 85% of the 
statutory area; or
(a)	both irrigated and 
unirrigated land, as follows :

(i)	The rule of 
exclusion will apply where the 
precondition exists that the 
irrigated area (having been brought 
to a single type under a common 
denominator) 40% or more of the 
statutory ceiling limit for irrigated 
land (this being calculated by 
excluding the unirrigated portion).  
If this precondition of not less than 
40% exists, then only the area of 
unirrigated land will be taken into 
account.  This will be done by 
converting the unirrigated land on 
the basis of the conversion formula 
existing, into the irrigated type.  
The irrigated area so computed 
from unirrigated land shall be 
added to the actual area of 
irrigated land and if after such 
clubbing together the total area in 
terms of irrigated land is 80% or 
more of the statutory ceiling limit 
for irrigated land, then the rule of 
exclusion will apply and 
disentitlement will occur;
(ii)	The rule of 
exclusion will not apply if the land 
holding of a family is exclusively 
unirrigated.

Criteria of income/wealth specified 
in Category VI below will apply

Deemed as agricultural holding 
and hence criteria at A above 
under this category will apply.

Criteria specified in Category VI 
below will apply.

Explanation: Building may be used 
for residential, industrial or 
commercial purpose and the like 
two or more such purposes.

VI. INCOME / 
WEALTH TEST

Son(s) and daughter(s) of
(a)	persons having gross 
annual income of Rs. 1 lakh or 
above or possessing wealth above 
the exemption limit as prescribed in 
the Wealth Tax Act for a period of 
three consecutive years;
(b)	persons in Categories I, 
II, III and V-A who are not 
disentitled to the benefit of 
reservation but have income from 
other sources of  wealth which will 
bring them within the 
income/wealth criteria mentioned in 
(a) above.

Explanation. 
(i)	Income from salaries or 
agricultural land shall not be 
clubbed;
(ii)	The income criteria in 
terms of rupee will be modified 
taking into account the change in 
its value every three years;  If the 
situation, however, so demands,  
the interregnum may be less.

Explanation: Wherever the expression 'permanent 
incapacitation' occurs in this Schedule, it shall mean 
incapacitation which results in putting an officer out 
of service."

154.	We make it clear that same principle of determining the creamy 
layer for providing 27% reservation for backward classes for 
appointment need not be strictly followed in case of reservation 
envisaged under Article 15(5) of the Constitution.  As pointed by 
Shri Ravivarma Kumar,  learned Senior Counsel,  if a strict income 
restriction is made for identifying the "creamy layer", those who are 
left in the particular caste may not be able to have a sufficient 
number of candidates for getting admission in the central 
institutions as per Act 5 of 2007.  Government can make a 
relaxation to some extent so that sufficient number of candidates 
may be available for the purpose of filling up the 27% reservation.   
It is for the Union Government and the State Governments to issue 
appropriate guidelines to identify the "creamy layer" so that SEBC 
are properly determined in accordance with the guidelines given by 
this Court.  If, even by applying this principle, still the candidates 
are not available, the State can issue appropriate guidelines to 
effectuate the implementation of the reservation purposefully.

155.	As noticed earlier, "backward class" defined in Section 2(g) 
does not exclude "creamy layer".  Therefore,  we make  it clear 
that backward class as defined in Section 2(g) of Act 5 of 2007 
must be deemed to have been such backward class by applying 
the principle of exclusion of "creamy layer".

8.   Whether the "creamy layer" principle is applicable to 
Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes ?

156.	 Learned Senior Counsel Dr. Rajeev Dhavan submitted that 
"creamy layer" principle is to be applied to SCs and STs. He drew 
inspiration from the observations made by Justice Krishna Iyer in 
N.M. Thomas's case (supra)  and also from the observations 
made in Nagaraj's case and reference was made to paragraphs 
80, 110 and 120 to 123 of Nagaraj's case (supra).

157.	N.M. Thomas's case (supra) does not state that "creamy layer" 
principle should apply to SCs and STs. In K.C. Vasanth Kumar's  
case (supra) the "creamy layer" was used in the case of backward 
caste or class.  In K.C. Vasanth Kumar   (supra), Desai J. quoted 
from N.M. Thomas (supra) as follows :-

"In the light of experience, here and elsewhere, the 
danger of 'reservation', it seems to me, is threefold.  
Its benefits, by and large, are snatched away by the 
top creamy layer of the 'backward' caste or class, 
thus keeping the weakest among the weak always 
weak and leave the fortunate layers to consume the 
whole cake."  
(N.M. Thomas (supra) p. 363, para 124) 



158.	In Nagaraj's case (supra) in paragraph 80, it is stated that while 
"applying the 'creamy layer' test, this Court held that if roster-point 
promotees are given consequential seniority, it will violate the 
equality principle which is part of the basic structure of the 
Constitution and in which even Article 16(4-A) cannot be of any 
help to the reserved category candidates."  This was with 
reference to the observations made in Indra Sawhney's case 
(supra)  and earlier in  M.G. Badappanavar &amp; Anr.  Vs.  State of 
Karnataka &amp; Ors. ;  Ajit Singh &amp; Ors. (II)   vs.  State of Punjab 
&amp; Ors.  and  Union of India &amp; Ors.   Vs.  Virpal Singh Chauhan 
&amp; Ors. .   Virpal Singh Chauhan's case (supra) dealt with 
reservation of railway employees wherein it is held that once the 
number of posts reserved for being filled by reserved category 
candidates in a cadre, category or grade (unit for application of 
rule of reservation) are filled by the operation of roster, the object 
of the rule of reservation should be deemed to have been 
achieved.  Ajit Singh II's case (supra) dealt with consequential 
seniority on promotion and held that roster points fixed at Level 1 
are not intended to determine any seniority at Level 1 between 
general candidates and the reserved candidates and the roster 
point merely becomes operative whenever a vacancy reserved at 
Level 2 becomes available.  Thereby holding that if promotion is 
obtained by way of reservation, the consequential seniority will not 
be counted.   M.G. Badappanavar's case (supra) followed the 
cases of Ajit Singh II   (supra) and Virpal Singh (supra).    

159.	In none of these decisions it is stated that the "creamy layer" 
principle would apply to SCs and STs.  In Indra Sawhney's case 
(supra), it is specifically stated that the "creamy layer" principle will 
not apply to STs and SCs.  In Nagaraj's case (supra) , in 
paragraphs 110 and 120 and finally in paragraphs 121, 122 and 
123, it is only stated that when considering questions of affirmative 
action, the larger principle of equality such as 50% ceiling 
(quantitative limitation) and "creamy layer" (quantitative exclusion) 
may be kept in mind.   In Nagaraj's case (supra) it has not been 
discussed  or decided that the creamy layer principle would be 
applicable to SCs/STs.  Therefore, it cannot be said that the 
observations made in Nagaraj's case are contrary to the decision 
in Indra Sawhney's case (supra).

160.	Moreover, the "creamy layer" principle is not yet applied as a 
principle of equality or as a general principle to apply for all 
affirmative actions.  The observations made by Chinnappa Reddy,  
J. in K.C. Vasanth Kumar case are relevant in this regard.  The 
learned Judge observed as under :

"One cannot quarrel with the statement that social 
science research and not judicial impressionism 
should form the basis of examination, by courts, of 
the sensitive question of reservation for backward 
classes.  Earlier we mentioned how the assumption 
that efficiency will be impaired if reservation 
exceeds 50%, if reservation is extended to 
promotional posts or if the carry forward rule is 
adopted, is not based on any scientific data.  One 
must, however, enter a caveat to the criticism that 
the benefits of reservation are often snatched away 
by the top creamy layer of backward class or caste. 
That a few of the seats and posts reserved for 
backward classes are snatched away by the more 
fortunate among them is not to say that reservation 
is not necessary.  This is bound to happen in a 
competitive society such as ours.  Are not the 
unreserved seats and posts snatched away, in the 
same way, by the top creamy layer of society itself?  
Seats reserved for the backward classes are taken 
away by the top layers amongst them on the same 
principle of merit on which the unreserved seats are 
taken away by the top layers of society." (p. 763)



161.	So far, this Court has not applied the "creamy layer" principle to 
the general principle of equality for the purpose of reservation.  
The "creamy layer" so far has been applied only to identify the 
backward class, as it required certain parameters to determine the 
backward classes. "Creamy layer" principle is one of the 
parameters to identify backward classes. Therefore, principally, the 
"creamy layer" principle cannot be applied to STs and SCs, as SCs 
and STs are separate classes by themselves.  Ray, CJ., in an 
earlier decisions, stated that "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes are not a caste within the ordinary meaning of caste".  And 
they are so identified by virtue of the Notification issued by the 
President of India under Articles 341 and 342 of the Constitution.  
The President may, after consultation with the Governor, by public 
notification, specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups 
within castes, races or tribes which for the purpose of the 
Constitution shall be deemed to be Scheduled Castes of 
Scheduled Tribes.   Once the Notification is issued, they are 
deemed to be the members of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes, whichever is applicable.   In E.V. Chinnaiah  (supra),  
concurring with the majority judgment, S.B. Sinha, J. said :-

"The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes occupy a 
special place in our Constitution. The President of India 
is the sole repository of the power to specify the castes, 
races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races 
or tribes which shall for the purposes of the Constitution 
be deemed to be Scheduled Castes. The Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 made in terms of Article 
341(1) is exhaustive.  The object of Articles 341 and 342 
is to provide for grant of protection to the backward class 
of citizens who are specified in the Scheduled Castes 
Order and Scheduled Tribes Order having regard to the 
economic and education backwardness wherefrom they 
suffer. Any legislation which would bring them out of the 
purview thereof or tinker with the order issued by the 
President of India would be unconstitutional.  (Paras 52, 
111 and 84)
(emphasis supplied) 


162.	A plea was raised by the respondent-State that categorization 
of Scheduled Castes could be justified by applying the "creamy 
layer" test as used in Indra Sawhney's case (supra) which was 
specifically rejected in paragraph 96 of the E.V. Chinnaiah's case 
(supra).  It is observed :-

But we must state that whenever such a situation 
arises in respect of Scheduled Caste, it will be 
Parliament alone to take the necessary legislative 
steps in terms of clause (2)  of Article 341 of the 
Constitution.  The States concededly do not have 
the legislative competence therefor." (p. 430)


163.	Moreover, right from the beginning, the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes were treated as a separate category and nobody 
ever disputed identification of such classes.  So long as "creamy 
layer" is not applied as one of the principles of equality, it cannot 
be applied to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. So far, it is 
applied only to identify the socially and educationally backward 
classes.  We make it clear that for the purpose of reservation, the 
principles of "creamy layer" are not applicable for Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes.

9.   Whether the principles laid down by the United States 
Supreme Court for affirmative action such as "suspect 
legislation", "strict scrutiny" and "compelling State 
necessity" are applicable to principles of reservation or other 
affirmative action contemplated under Article 15(5) of the 
Constitution of India ?

164.	Based on the Ninety-Third Constitutional Amendment Act, Act  
5 of 2007 has been enacted.  According to the petitioner's 
Counsel, this is a "suspect legislation" and therefore, it is to be 
subjected to "strict scrutiny"  as laid by the United States Supreme 
Court and only by passing this test of "strict scrutiny", such 
legislation could be put into practice. 

165.	At the outset, it must be stated that the decisions of the United 
States Supreme Court were not applied in the Indian context as it 
was felt that the structure of the provisions under the two 
Constitutions and the social conditions as well as other factors are 
widely different in both the countries.  Reference may be made to 
Bhikaji Narain Dhakras &amp; Ors.  Vs.  The State of Madhya 
Pradesh &amp; Anr.   and A.S. Krishna  Vs.  State of Madras  
wherein this Court specifically held that the due process clause in 
the Constitution of the United States of America is not applicable to 
India.  While considering the scope and applicability of Article 
19(1)(g) in Kameshwar Prasad and Others  Vs.  State of Bihar 
and Another ,  it was observed "-

"As regards these decisions of the American Courts, 
it should be borne in mind that though the First 
Amendment to the Constitution of the United States 
reading "Congress shall make no law .abridging 
the freedom of speech." appears to confer no 
power on the Congress to impose any restriction on 
the exercise of the guaranteed right, still it has 
always been understood that the freedom 
guaranteed is subject to the police power  the 
scope of which however has not been defined with 
precision or uniformly. " (p. 378)


166.	 In Kesavananda Bharati  case also, while considering the 
extent and scope of the power of amendment under Article 368 of 
the Constitution of India, the Constitution of the United States of 
America was extensively referred to and Ray, J., held :-

"The American decisions which have been 
copiously cited before us, were rendered in the 
context of the history of the struggle against 
colonialism of the American people, sovereignty of 
several States which came together to form a 
Confederation, the strains and pressures which 
induced them to frame a Constitution for a Federal 
Government and the underlying concepts of law and 
judicial approach over a period of nearly 200 years, 
cannot be used to persuade this Court to apply their 
approach in determining the cases arising under our 
Constitution".  (p. 615)


167.	 It may also be noticed that there are structural differences in 
the Constitution of India and the Constitution of the United States 
of America.  Reference may be made to the 14th Amendment to 
the U.S. Constitution.  Some of the relevant portions thereof are as 
follows:

"All persons born or naturalized in the United 
States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State 
wherein they reside. No State shall make or enforce 
any law which shall abridge the privileges and 
immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall 
any State deprive any person of life, liberty or 
property without due process of law nor deny to any 
person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of 
the laws."

168.	Whereas in India, Articles 14 and 18 are differently structured 
and contain express provisions for special provision for the 
advancement of SEBCs, STs and SCs.  Moreover, in our 
Constitution there is a specific provision under the Directive 
Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the Constitution requiring the 
State to strive for justice  social, economic and political  and to 
minimize the inequalities of income and endeavour to eliminate 
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities (Article 38).   
Earlier, there was a view that Articles 16(4) and 15(5) are 
exceptions to Article 16(1) and 15(1) respectively.	  This view 
was held in The General Manager Southern Railways Vs. 
Rangachari  and M.R. Balaji   Vs. State of Mysore .  

169.	In T. Devadasan  (supra), Subba Rao J., gave a dissenting 
opinion wherein he held that Article 16(4) was not an exception to 
Article 16(1).  He observed:-

"The expression 'nothing in this article' is a 
legislative device to express its intention in a most 
emphatic way that the power conferred thereunder 
is not limited in any way by the main provision but 
falls outside it.  It has not really carved out an 
exception, but has preserved a power untrammeled 
by the other provisions of the Article."

170.	In two other subsequent decisions, i.e. in Triloki Nath (I)  
(supra) and T. Devadasan case (supra), it was held that article 
15(4) and 16(4) are exceptions to Article 15(1) and 16(1) 
respectively.  But a 7-Judge Bench in State of Kerala Vs. N.M. 
Thomas  (supra) held that Article 15(4) and 16(4) are not 
exceptions to Article 15(1) and 16(1) respectively.  Fazal Ali J., 
said :

"This form of classification which is referred to as 
reservation, is in my opinion, clearly covered by 
Article 16(4) of the Constitution which is completely 
exhaustive on this point.  That is to say clause (4) of 
Article 16 is not an exception to Article 14 in the 
sense that whatever classification can be made, can 
be done only through clause (4) of Article 16.  
Clause (4) of Article 16, however, is an explanation 
containing an exhaustive and exclusive provision 
regarding reservation which is one of the forms of 
classification."

171.	This brought out a drastic change in the view of this Court.  In 
K.C. Vasanth Kumar  Vs.   State of Karnataka  (supra), 
Venkatramaiah J. observed:

"Article 14 of the Constitution consists of two parts.  
It asks the State not to deny to any person equality 
before law.  It also asks the State not to deny the 
equal protection of the laws.  Equality before law 
connotes absence of any discrimination in law.  The 
concept of equal protection required the State to 
mete out differential treatment to persons in 
different situations in order to establish an 
equilibrium amongst all.  This is the basis of the rule 
that equals should be treated equally and unequals 
must be treated unequally if the doctrine of equality 
which is one of the corner-stone of our Constitution 
is to be duly implemented.  In order to do justice 
amongst unequals, the State has to resort to 
compensatory or protective discrimination.  Article 
15(4) and Article 16(4) of the Constitution were 
enacted as measures of compensatory or protective 
discrimination to grant relief to persons belonging to 
socially oppressed castes and minorities." 

172.	The amendment to Article 15 by inserting Article 15(5) and the 
new Act (Act 5 of 2007) are to be viewed in the background of 
these constitutional provisions.  It may also be recalled that the 
Preamble to the Constitution and the Directive Principles of State 
Policy give a positive mandate to the State and the State is obliged 
to remove inequalities and backwardness from society. While 
considering the constitutionality of a social justice legislation, it is 
worthwhile to note the objectives which have been incorporated by 
the Constitution makers in the Preamble of the Constitution  and 
how they are sought to be secured by enacting fundamental rights 
in Part III and Directives Principles of State Policy in Part IV of the 
Constitution. The Fundamental Rights represent the civil and 
political rights and the Directive Principles embody social and 
economic rights.  Together they are intended to carry out the 
objectives set out in the Preamble of the Constitution.  Granville 
Austin, in his book , states :

"Both types of rights have developed as a common 
demand, products of the national and social 
revolutions, of their almost inseparable intertwining, 
and of the character of Indian politics itself."

173.	From the constitutional history of India, it can be seen that from 
the point of view of importance and significance, no distinction can 
be made between the two sets of rights, namely, Fundamental 
Rights which are made justiciable and the Directives Principles 
which are made non-justiciable. The Directive Principles of State 
Policy are made non-justiciable for the reason that the 
implementation of many of these rights would depend on the 
financial capability of the State. Non-justiciable clause was 
provided for the reason that an infant State shall not be made 
accountable immediately for not fulfilling these obligations. Merely 
because the Directive Principles are non-justiciable by the judicial 
process does not mean that they are of subordinate importance.  
In Champakam Dorairajan's case (supra), it was observed that 
"the Directive Principles have to conform to and run subsidiary to 
the Chapter of Fundamental Rights."   But this view did not hold for 
a long time and was later changed in a series of subsequent 
decisions.  (See : In Re. Kerala Education Bill, 1957 ;   
Minerava Mills (supra))

174.	 	In Minerva Mills   (supra)    Bhagwati, J observed :

"The Fundamental Rights are no doubt important 
and valuable in a democracy, but there can be no 
real democracy without social and economic justice 
to the common man and to create socio-economic 
conditions in which there can be social and 
economic justice to every one, is the theme of the 
Directive Principles.  It is the Directive Principles 
which nourish the roots of our democracy, provide 
strength and vigour to it and attempt to make it a 
real participatory democracy which does not remain 
merely a political democracy with Fundamental 
Rights available to all irrespective of their power, 
position or wealth.  The dynamic provisions of the 
Directive Principles fertilise the static provisions of 
the Fundamental Rights.  The object of the 
Fundamental Rights is to protect individual liberty, 
but can individual liberty be considered in isolation 
from the socio-economic structure in which it is to 
operate.  There is a real connection between 
individual liberty and the shape and form of the 
social and economic structure of the society.   Can 
there be any individual liberty at all for the large 
masses of people who are suffering from want and 
privation  and who are cheated out of their individual 
rights by the exploitative economic system?  Would 
their individual liberty not come in conflict with the 
liberty of the socially and economically more 
powerful class and in the process, get mutilated or 
destroyed?  It is exiomatic that the real 
controversies in the present day society are not 
between power and freedom but between one form 
of liberty and another.  Under the present socio-
economic system, it is the liberty of the few which is 
in conflict with the liberty of the many.  The Directive 
Principles therefore, impose an obligation on the 
State to take positive action for creating socio-
economic conditions in which there will be an 
egalitarian social order with social and economic 
justice to all, so that individual liberty will become a 
cherished value  and the dignity of the individual a 
living reality, not only for a few privileged persons 
but for the entire people of the country.  It will thus 
be seen that the Directive Principles enjoy a  very 
high place in the constitutional scheme and it is only 
in the framework of the socio-economic structure 
envisaged in the Directive Principles that the 
Fundamental Rights are intended to operate, for it is 
only then they can become meaningful and 
significant for the millions of our poor and deprived 
people who do not have been the bare necessities 
of life and who are living below the poverty level."

175.	Article 46 enjoins upon the State to promote with special care 
the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of 
the people and to protect them from social injustice and all forms 
of exploitation whereas under the Constitution of the United States 
of America, we get an entirely different picture. Though equality 
was one of the solemn affirmations of the American Declaration of 
Independence, slavery continued unabatedly and it was, to some 
extent, legally recognized.  In Dred Scott Vs. Saunders  wherein 
Chief Justice Taney held that [African-Americans] were not entitled 
to get citizenship.  He was of the view that 'once a slave always a 
slave', and one slave never would become the citizen of America.  
This view held by the Chief Justice Taney continued for a long time 
and after the Civil War, the 14th amendment was enacted in 1868 
and this amendment gave (equal protection of laws to all persons).  
In Plassy Vs. Ferguson   which involved a challenge to a 
Louisiana statute that provided for equal but separate 
accommodations for black and white passengers in trains, the 
United States Supreme Court was of the view that racial 
segregation was a reasonable exercise of State police power for 
the promotion of the public good and upheld the law.  Several 
affirmative actions were challenged and the landmark decision of 
Brown  Vs. Board of Education  was delivered in 1954.  In 
many cases, the strict scrutiny doctrine was being applied to all 
laws of racial classifications.  The learned Counsel for the 
petitioner made reference to Gratz Vs. Bollinger (supra) and 
some of the earlier decisions of the United States Supreme Court.  
During the past two decades, the Court has become sceptical of 
race-based affirmative action practiced or ordered by the State.  
The Supreme Court of the US is of the view that affirmative action 
plans must rest upon a sufficient showing or predicate of past 
discrimination which must go beyond the effects of societal 
discrimination.  

176.	The 14th Amendment to the Constitution of the United States of 
America and Title VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act, prohibit 
universities to discriminate on the basis of classifications such as 
race, colour, national origin and the like in all their operations. In a 
number of decisions of the United States Supreme Court spanning 
decades of jurisprudence, a heavy burden has been placed on 
institutions whose affirmative action programmes are challenged 
before the United States Supreme Court on grounds that have 
been recognized as suspect or unconstitutional. According to the 
United States Supreme Court, all such programmes are inherently 
suspect since they rely on suspect forms of classification (such as 
race). Therefore, because such forms of classification are 
inherently suspect, the courts have subjected all affirmative action 
programmes relying on them to a very high standard of scrutiny, 
wherein those practicing these affirmative action programmes 
have to adhere to a very high standard of proof, which we know as 
the "strict scrutiny" test. 

177.	The case of Regents of the University of California  Vs. 
Bakke   provided a starting point and from this case onwards, 
affirmative action programmes can be justified only on two distinct 
grounds, and only these grounds have been recognized as 
compelling enough so as to satisfy the "strict scrutiny" test, as 
developed by the United States Supreme Court. The two grounds 
are as follows: 

1. Remedial Justification: All efforts aimed at remedying past 
injustices against certain identified groups of people, who were 
unlawfully discriminated against in the past, serve as adequate 
justifications and all affirmative action programmes that are 
implemented with this aim serve the compelling institutional interest 
in removing all vestiges of discrimination that occurred in the past. 
In the case of City of Richmond  Vs.  J A Croson Co. , the United 
States Supreme Court held that if a university is able to show "some 
showing of prior discrimination" in its existing affirmative action 
program furthering racial exclusion then the university may take 
"affirmative steps to dismantle such a system". However, it is to be 
noted that the US Supreme Court also attached a warning with the 
above observation. While scrutinizing such programmes, it was held 
that the Court would make "searching judicial inquiry into the 
justification for such race-based measures... [and to] identify that 
discrimination... with some specificity before they may use race-
conscious relief". (Croson's Case )

2. Diversity- All affirmative action programmes aimed at bringing 
about racial diversity among the scholarship of the institution(s) may 
be said to in furtherance of compelling institutional interest. The 
starting point for this ground is Justice Powell's detailed opinion 
regarding the issue of diversity in the case of Regents of the 
University of California Vs. Bakke  (supra). In this case, according 
to Justice Powell, "[t]he attainment of a diverse student body is 
clearly a constitutionally permissible goal for an institution of higher 
education". He quoted from two of the Supreme Court's decisions 
regarding academic freedom [Sweezy Vs. New Hampshire  and 
Keyishian Vs. Board of Regents ]  and observed:

"[I]t is the business of a university to provide that 
atmosphere which is most conducive to speculation, 
experiment and creation.........The atmosphere of 
speculation, experiment and creation  so essential 
to the quality of higher education  is widely believed 
to be promoted by a diverse student body. ... [I]t is not 
too much to say that the nation's future depends upon 
leaders trained through wide exposure to the ideas 
and mores of students as diverse as this Nation of 
many peoples." 

178.	The other part of the "strict scrutiny" test is the "narrow tailoring" 
test. The University, whose affirmative action programme is in 
question before the United States Supreme Court, is required to 
prove that its affirmative action programme has been designed in the 
narrowest possible manner, in order to benefit only those specific 
people who are to be benefited, thus serving the "compelling 
purposes" of the affirmative action programme. The program cannot 
be made in a broad manner to encompass a large group of people, 
and it has to serve the minimum possible requirement, in order to 
achieve its goal. Otherwise, it may be possible that the rights of other 
people may be infringed upon, which would make the affirmative 
action programme unconstitutional. 

179.	Thus, the first limb of the strict scrutiny test that elucidates the 
"compelling institutional interest" is focused on the objectives that 
affirmative action programmes are designed to achieve. The second 
limb, that of "narrow tailoring", focuses on the details of specific 
affirmative action programmes and on the specific people it aims to 
benefit.

180.	The United States Supreme Court has held that race may be one 
of the many factors that can be taken into account while structuring 
an affirmative action programme. At this stage, an analogy may be 
drawn with the Indian situation wherein the Supreme Court of India, 
in various cases, has held that caste may be one of the factors that 
can be taken into account, while providing for reservations for the 
socially and educationally backward classes. However, caste cannot 
be the "only" factor, just as race alone cannot be the only factor in the 
United States, while structuring reservation or affirmative action 
programmes. 

181.	Furthermore, the courts, both in India as well as in the United 
States of America, have looked with extreme caution and care at any 
legislation that aims to discriminate on the basis of race in the US 
and caste in India. As the US Supreme Court elucidated in the case 
of Grutter Vs. Bollinger (supra), "Because the Fourteenth 
Amendment "protect[s] persons, not groups," all governmental action 
based on race ought to be subjected to a very detailed and careful 
judicial inquiry and scrutiny so as to ensure that the personal right to 
equal protection of the laws has not been infringed. (See :  Adarand 
Constructors Inc. Vs.  Peqa) .  

182.	It therefore follows that the government may treat people 
differently because of their race but only for those reasons that serve 
what is known as "compelling government interest". 

183.	Furthermore, for any affirmative action programme to survive the 
strict standard of judicial scrutiny, the Courts want "compelling 
evidence", that proves without any doubt that the affirmative action 
program is narrowly tailored and serves only the most compelling of 
interests. Thus, the bar for the State or institution that practices 
affirmative action programmes based of suspect classifications has 
been effectively raised. Therefore, in cases where a compelling 
interest is found, race-based methods may be used only after all 
other methods have been considered and found deficient, and that 
too only to that limited extent which is required to remedy a 
discrimination that has been identified, and only when it has been 
shown that the identified beneficiaries have suffered previously in the 
past, and lastly, only if all undue burdens that may impinge upon the 
rights of other non- beneficiaries are avoided.

184.	The aforesaid principles applied by the Supreme Court of the 
United States of America cannot be applied directly to India as the 
gamut of affirmative action in India is fully supported by 
constitutional provisions and we have not applied the principles of  
"suspect legislation" and we have been following the doctrine that 
every legislation passed by the Parliament is presumed to be 
constitutionally valid unless otherwise proved.  We have 
repeatedly held that the American decisions are not strictly 
applicable to us and the very same principles of strict scrutiny and 
suspect legislation were sought to be applied and this Court 
rejected the same in Saurabh Chaudhari Vs. Union of India .    
Speaking for the bench, V.N. Khare, CJI, said:

"The strict scrutiny test or the intermediate scrutiny 
test applicable in the United States of America as 
argued by Shri Salve cannot be applied in this case.  
Such a test is not applied in Indian Courts.  In any 
event, such a test may be applied in a case where a 
legislation ex facie is found to be unreasonable.  
Such a test may also be applied in a case where by 
reason of a statute the life and liberty of a citizen is 
put in jeopardy.  This Court since its inception apart 
from a few cases where the legislation was found to 
be ex facie wholly unreasonable proceeded on the 
doctrine that constitutionality of a statute is to be 
presumed and the burden to prove contra is on him 
who asserts the same."

185.	Learned Counsel Shri Sushil Kumar Jain contended that the 
classification of OBCs was not properly done and it is not clear as 
to whose benefit the legislation itself is made therefore, it is a 
suspect legislation.  This contention  cannot be accepted.  We are 
of the view that the challenge of Act 5 of 2007 on the ground that it 
does not stand the "strict scrutiny" test and there was no 
"compellable State necessity" to enact this legislation cannot be 
accepted.

10.   Whether delegation of power to the Union Government to 
determine as to who shall be the backward class is 
constitutionally valid?

186.		The learned Counsel for the petitioners contended that 
though "Backward Class"  is defined under Section 2(g) of Act 5 of 
2007,  it is not stated in the Act how the "Backward Class" would 
be identified and the delegation of such power to the Union of India 
to determine as to who shall be the "backward class" without their 
being proper guidelines is illegal as it amounts to excessive 
delegation. According to the learned Counsel for the petitioners, 
the Parliament itself should have laid down the guidelines and 
decided that who shall be included in the backward class as 
defined under Section 2(g) of the Act 5 of 2007.   "Backward class" 
is not a new word.  Going by the Constitution, there are sufficient 
constitutional provisions to have an idea as to what  "backward 
class" is.  Article 340 of the Constitution specifically empowers the 
President of India to appoint a Commission to investigate the 
conditions of the socially and educationally backward classes 
within the territory of India.  Socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens are mentioned in Article 15(4) of the 
Constitution, which formed the First Amendment to the 
Constitution.  Backward class citizens are also mentioned in Article 
16(4) of the Constitution.  It is only for the purpose of Act 5 of 2007 
that the Union of India has been entrusted with the task of 
determining the backward class. There is already a National 
Commission and also various State Commissions dealing with the 
affairs of the backward class of citizens in this country.  For the 
purpose of enforcement of the legislation passed under Article 
16(4), the backward class of citizens have already been identified 
and has been in practice since the past 14 years.  It is in this 
background that the Union of India has been given the task of 
determining the backward classes.  The determination of backward 
classes itself is a laborious task and the Parliament cannot do it by 
itself.  It is incorrect to say that there are no sufficient guidelines to 
determine the backward classes.  Various parameters have been 
used and it may also be noticed that if any undeserving caste or 
group of persons are included in the backward class,  it is open to 
any person to challenge the same through judicial review.  
Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the Union of India has been 
given wide powers to determine the backward classes.  The 
challenge of Act 5 of 2007 on that ground fails.

11.  Whether the Act is invalid as there is no time limit 
prescribed for its operation and no periodical review is 
contemplated?

187.		The learned Counsel for the petitioners contended that the 
reservation of 27% provided for the backward classes in the 
educational institutions contemplated under the Act does not 
prescribe any time limit and this is opposed to the principle of 
equality.  According to learned Counsel for the petitioners, this 
affirmative action that is to bring about equality is  calculated to 
produce equality on a broader  basis by eliminating de facto 
inequalities and placing the weaker sections of the community on a 
footing of equality with the stronger and more power section so 
that each member of the community, whatever is his birth, 
occupation or social position may enjoy equal opportunity of using 
to the full, his natural endowments of physique, of character and of 
intelligence.  This compensatory state action can be continued 
only for a period till that inequality is wiped off.  Therefore, the 
petitioners have contended that unless the period is prescribed, 
this affirmative action will continue for an indefinite period and 
would ultimately result in reverse discrimination.  It is true that 
there is some force in the contention advanced by the learned 
Counsel for the petitioners but that may happen in future if the 
reservation policy as contemplated under the Act is successfully 
implemented.  But at the outset, it may not be possible to fix a time 
limit or a period of time. Depending upon the result of the 
measures and improvements that have taken place in the status 
and educational advancement of the socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens, the matter could be examined by the 
Parliament at a future time but that cannot be a ground for striking 
down a legislation. After some period, if it so happens that any 
section of the community gets an undue advantage of the 
affirmative action, then such community can very well be excluded 
from such affirmative action programme. The Parliament can 
certainly review the situation and even though a specific class of 
citizens is in the legislation, it is the constitutional duty of the 
Parliament to review such affirmative action as and when the 
social conditions are required.  There is also the safeguard of 
judicial review and the court can exercise its powers of judicial 
review and say that the affirmative action has carried out its 
mission and is thus no longer required.  In the case of reservation 
of 27% for backward classes, there could be a periodic review 
after a period  of  10  years  and  the Parliament could examine 
whether the reservation has worked for the good of the country.  
Therefore, the legislation cannot be held to be invalid on that 
ground but a review can be made after a period of 10 years.

12.   What shall be the educational standard to be prescribed 
to find out whether any class is educationally backward?

188.		Learned Senior Counsel Shri P.P. Rao contended that under 
Article 15(5) of the Constitution, the reservation or any other 
affirmative action could be made for the advancement of only 
socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes and the educational 
standard to be assessed shall be matriculation or 10+2 and not 
more than that.  It was argued that many castes included in the 
backward class list have got a fairly good number of members who 
have passed 10+2 and thus such castes are to be treated as 
educationally forward and the present legislation, namely, Act 5 of 
2007, is intended to give reservation to students in higher 
institutions of learning and the same is not permissible under 
Article 15(5) of the Constitution.  He contended that the Parliament 
should not have made this legislation for reservation in the higher 
institutions of learning as it is not part of the duty of the State under 
Article 46 of the Constitution.  According to the learned Counsel, 
education contemplated under Article 46 is only giving education 
upto the standard of 10+2.  The learned Counsel argued that this 
was the desire of the Founding Fathers of the Constitution.  The 
learned Counsel contended further that the State is not taking 
adequate steps to improve primary education. 

189.	 	In reply to Shri P.P. Rao's arguments, learned Solicitor 
General Shri G. E. Vahanvati drew our attention to various steps 
taken by the Union Government to improve the primary school 
education and also the upper primary school education.  It is 
incorrect to suggest that there have been no efforts on the part of 
successive Governments to concentrate on level of education 
towards universal elementary education. "Sarva Shiksha Abhiyanm"  
(SSA)  had been launched by the Government in 2001-2002.  The 
major components of SSA include opening of new schools, 
distribution of teaching equipments, school grant for teachers and 
maintenance for schools, community participation &amp; training, 
carrying out civil works in school buildings, additional class rooms, 
distribution of free text books for ST students and girls.   It was 
pointed out that in the year 2006-2007, nearly Rs. 15,000 crores 
had been spent for such education. The Integrated Child 
Development Services (ICDS) scheme was started in 1975.  Latest 
figures show that progress has been made in the field of 
education.  It is pointed out that the primary school coverage has 
increased from 86.96% (2002) to 96% and that of Upper Primary 
School has increased from 78.11% to 85.3% with the opening of 
1.34 Lakh Primary Schools and 1.01 lakh Upper Primary Schools. 
The gross enrolment has also increased at the primary as well as 
upper primary stage. Drop out rate has fallen by 11.3%.   It is also 
pointed out that  girls enrolment has increased from 43.7% (2001) 
to 46.7% (2004) at primary and from 40.9% to 44% at upper 
primary stage.  The Union of India has granted funds to various 
states for the purpose of meeting the education requirements.  The 
entire details were furnished to the Court and we do not think it 
necessary to go into these details.  Though at the time of attaining 
Independence, the basic idea was to improve primary and 
secondary level education, but now, after a period of more than 50 
years, it is idle to contend that the backward classes shall be 
determined on the basis of their attaining education only to the 
level of 10+2 stage.  In India there are a large number of arts, 
science and professional colleges and in the field of education, it is 
anachronistic to contend that  primary education or secondary 
education shall be the index for fixing backward class of  citizens.  
We find no force in the contention advanced by the learned 
Counsel for the petitioners and it is only to be rejected.

13.   Whether the quantum of reservation provided for in the 
Act is valid and whether 27% of seats for SEBC was required 
to be reserved?

190.		The main contention of the petitioner's Counsel especially 
that of Shri Sushil Kumar Jain is that the entire Act is liable to be 
set aside as there was no necessity to provide any reservation to 
socially and educationally backward classes and according to him 
most of the castes included in the list which is prepared in 
accordance with the Mandal Commission are educationally very 
much advanced and the population of such group is not 
scientifically collected and the population ratio of backward classes 
is projected only on the basis of the 1931 census and the entire 
legislation is an attempt to please a section of the society as part 
of a vote catching mechanism.

191.	  	A legislation passed by the Parliament can be challenged 
only on constitutionally recognized grounds.  Ordinarily, grounds of 
attack of a legislation is whether the legislature has legislative 
competence or whether the legislation is ultra vires of the 
provisions of the Constitution.  If any of the provisions of the 
legislation violates fundamental rights or any other provisions of 
the Constitution, it could certainly be a valid ground to set aside 
the legislation by invoking the power of judicial review.  A 
legislation could also be challenged as unreasonable if it violates 
the principles of equality adumbrated in our Constitution or it 
unreasonably restricts the fundamental rights under Article 19 of 
the Constitution.  A  legislation cannot be challenged simply on the 
ground of unreasonableness because that by itself does not 
constitute a ground.  The validity of a constitutional amendment 
and the validity of plenary legislation have to be decided purely as 
questions of constitutional law.  This Court in State of Rajasthan 
&amp; Ors.   Vs.  Union of India and Others   said :

"if a question brought before the Court is purely a 
politically question not involving determination of 
any legal or constitutional right or obligation, the 
court would not entertain it, since the Court is 
concerned only with adjudication of legal rights and 
liabilities."

192.		Therefore, the plea of the Petitioner that the legislation itself 
was intended to please a section of the community as part of the 
vote catching mechanism is not a legally acceptable plea and it is 
only to be rejected.

193.		The quantum of reservation provided under the Act 5 of 2007 
is based on the detailed facts available with the Parliament.  
Various commissions have been in operation determining as to 
who shall form the SEBCs.  Though a caste-wise census is not 
available, several other data and statistics are available.  In the 
case of Indra Sawhney  (supra), the Mandal Commission was 
accepted in principle though the details and findings of the 
commissions were not fully accepted by this Court.  27% of 
reservation in the matter of employment was accepted by this 
Court.  Petitioners have not produced any documents to show that 
the backward class citizens are less than 27%, vis-`-vis, the total 
population of this country or that there was no requirement of 27% 
reservation for them.  The Parliament is invested with the power of 
legislation and must be deemed to have taken into consideration 
all relevant circumstances when passing a legislation of this 
nature.  It is futile to contend whether Parliament was not aware of 
the statistical details of the population of this country and, 
therefore, we do not think that 27% reservation provided in the Act 
is illegal or on that account, the Act itself is liable to be struck 
down.

Questions:

1.	Whether the Ninety-Third  Amendment of the Constitution is 
against the "basic structure" of the Constitution?	

	The Constitution (Ninety-Third Amendment) Act, 2005 does 
not violate the "basic structure" of the Constitution so far as it 
relates to the state maintained institutions and aided educational 
institutions.  Question whether the Constitution (Ninety-Third 
Amendment) Act, 2005 would be constitutionally valid or not so far 
as "private unaided" educational institutions are concerned, is left 
open to be decided in an appropriate case. 	 (Paragraph 79)

2.	Whether Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are mutually contradictory, 
hence Article 15(5) is to be held ultra vires?	

Article 15(5) is constitutionally valid and Articles 15(4) and 
15(5) are not mutually contradictory.	               (Paragraph 100)

3.	Whether exclusion of minority educational institutions from 
Article 15(5) is violative of Article 14 of Constitution?	

Exclusion of minority educational institutions from Article 
15(5) is not violative of Article 14 of the Constitution as the minority 
educational institutions, by themselves, are a separate class and 
their rights are protected by other constitutional provisions.
(Paragraph 102)

4.	Whether the Constitutional Amendment followed the 
procedure prescribed under Article 368 of the Constitution? 

The Ninety-Third  Amendment of the Constitution does not 
affect the executive power of the State under Article 162 of the 
Constitution and hence, procedure prescribed under Proviso to 
Article 368(2) is not required to be followed.	                    
                         (Paragraph 103)

5.	Whether the Act 5 of 2007 is constitutionally invalid in view of 
definition of "Backward Class" and whether the identification 
of such "Backward Class" based on "caste" is 
constitutionally valid?

		Identification of "backward class" is not done solely based on 
caste.  Other parameters are followed in identifying the backward 
class.  Therefore, Act 5 of 2007 is not invalid for this reason.
	(Paragraph 142)




6.	Whether "Creamy Layer" is to be excluded from SEBCs?	

"Creamy Layer" is to be excluded from SEBCs.  The 
identification of SEBCs will not be complete and without the 
exclusion of "creamy layer" such identification may not be valid 
under Article 15(1) of the Constitution.                  (Paragraph 152)

7.	What should be the para-meters for determining the "creamy 
layer" group?	

The parameters contained in the Office Memorandum issued 
by the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) 
on 08.09.1993 may be applied.  And the definition of "Other 
Backward Classes" under Section 2(g) of the Act 5 of 2007 should 
be deemed to mean class or classes of citizens who are socially 
and educationally backward, and so determined by the Central 
Government; and if the determination is with reference to caste, 
then the backward class shall be after excluding the creamy layer.
						        (Paragraphs 153 and 155)

8.	Whether the "creamy layer" principle is applicable to 
Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes?		

"Creamy Layer" principle is not applicable to Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes.		             (Paragraph 163)

9.	Whether the principles laid down by the United States 
Supreme Court for affirmative action such as "suspect 
legislation", "strict scrutiny" and "compelling State 
necessity" are applicable to principles of reservation   or 
other affirmative action contemplated under Article 15(5) of 
the Constitution?

 	The principles laid down by the United States Supreme 
Court such as "suspect legislation", "strict scrutiny" and 
"compelling State necessity" are not applicable for challenging the 
validity of Act 5 of 2007 or reservations or other affirmative action 
contemplated under Article 15(5) of the Constitution.	
	        (Paragraphs 184)

10.	Whether delegation of power to the Union Government to 
determine as to who shall be the backward class is 
constitutionally valid? 

The delegation of power to the Union Government to 
determine as to who shall be the "other backward classes" is not 
excessive delegation.  Such delegation is constitutionally valid.  
							              (Paragraph 186)

11.	Whether the Act is invalid as there is no time limit prescribed 
for its operation and no periodical review is contemplated? 

The Act 5 of 2007 is not invalid for the reason that there is 
no time limit prescribed for its operation, but a review can be made 
after a period of 10 years.			             (Paragraph 187)

12.	What shall be the educational standard to be prescribed to 
find out whether any class is educationally backward? 
The contention that educational standard of matriculation or 
(10+2) should be the benchmark to find out whether any class is 
educationally backward is rejected.		    (Paragraph 189)

13.	Whether the quantum of reservation provided for in the Act is 
valid and whether 27% of seats for SEBC was required to be 
reserved?

27% of seats for other backward classes is not illegal and 
the Parliament must be deemed to have taken into consideration 
all relevant circumstances when fixing the 27% reservation.
(Paragraph 193)


These Writ Petitions are disposed off in light of the above 
findings, and the "Other Backward Classes" defined in Section 2(g) 
of Act 5 of 2007 is to be read as "Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes" other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, determined as 'Other Backward Classes' by the Central 
Government and if such determination is with reference to caste, it 
shall exclude "Creamy Layer" from among such caste.  In 
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 112/2007 in Writ Petition (C) No. 
265/2006, no orders are required.  It is dismissed.

