
Supreme Court of India
Dumpala Chandra Reddy vs Nimakayala Balireddy &amp; Ors on 14 July, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam, Mukundakam Sharma
                                                  REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.309 OF 2001



Dumpala Chandra Reddy                          ...Appellant

          Vs.

Nimakayala Balireddy and Ors.                  ...Respondents


                (With Crl. Appeal No. 310 of 2001)



                            JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.              Heard learned counsel for the parties.


2         These two appeals, one by the complainant Dumpala

Chandra Reddy and other by the State of A.P. question the

correctness of judgment of a Division Bench of the Andhra

Pradesh    High    Court,   which,   while   holding     that   the

respondents were responsible for causing the death of one

Gangireddigari Kondareddy (hereinafter referred to as the

                                                                1
`deceased') convicted them in terms of Section 326 of the

Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short `the IPC') instead of Section

302 IPC as was done by the Trial Court.


3.       The     respondents,   along   with   one   Nimmakayala

Lakshmi Reddy (A-8) s/o Obul Reddy faced trial for alleged

commission of offences punishable under Sections 148, 302

IPC and in respect of the deceased A-8, Section 114 IPC. The

Trial Court found the accused persons guilty of offences

punishable under Section 148 IPC and also under Section 302

IPC.   For the former offence, they were directed to undergo

sentence of two years while for the latter offence, life

imprisonment was imposed.


4.        Substance of the accusations, which led to the trial,

is as follows.


          All the accused are residents of Gopalapuram village.

The deceased was a resident of Khajipalli village. PWs 1 and 3

are also the residents of Khajipalli village. PWs 1 and 2 are


                                                             2
the brother-in-laws of the deceased and PW3 is the brother of

the deceased.


           Originally, all the accused were residents of Khajipalli

village.   Due to factions with the deceased's family, the

deceased left the village and migrated to Gopalapuram village.

About 18 years ago, A-8's brother's son by name Pattabhi

Reddy married one Dumpala Munemma, resident of Khajipalli

village. Munemma is related to the family of the deceased. A-

2 and A-4 are brothers of Pattabhi Reddy.         Pattabhi Reddy

deserted his wife Munemma, resident of Khajipalli village.

Due to that, there were differences between the accused and

the deceased and also there were criminal cases filed against

each other.


           Accused persons were residents of Khajipalli village.

After filing of the criminal cases, the accused left Khajipalli

and settled down at Gopalapuram. About 8 years prior to the

murder of the deceased, A-2, A-4 and Pattabhi Reddy had

stabbed PW3 and the deceased in a lane by the side of


                                                               3
Sangham     Lodge    at   Cuddapah.     One    year   thereafter

Nimmakayala Gangireddy was murdered in Khajipalli village in

the fields. In that regard, a criminal case was filed against the

deceased family and that criminal case ended in acquittal.

After that incident, the deceased's family alongwith his

brothers settled down at Hyderabad and was running a motor

rewinding workshop.


          On the date of the incident i.e. on 25.12.1995, the

deceased went to his village from Hyderabad in the morning

hours. After sometime the deceased took PW-1 and went to

Patha Cuddapah to fix up the marriage date of his younger

brother. The deceased and PW-1 took Lingamappli bus at the

village at about 8.30 A.M. and reached Cuddapah at 9.30 A.M.

PW-1 and the deceased went to see one Raja Reddy, who

happened to be the proprietor of Sangham Medical Stores,

and they found that Raja Reddy was not available in the

medical shop and then they went to Venkateswara Cloth

Stores.   By that time, Venkateswara Reddy, a resident of



                                                             4
Balisingapalli, was also present in the cloth shop.     The

deceased telephoned Raja Reddy. After sometime Raja came

to the cloth shop and they were talking to each other at the

shop.   After sometime, the deceased, PW1, Venkata Subba

Reddy and Raja Reddy went to Manasa Hotel situated in

Madras road.    At about 2.30 P.M. the deceased along with

others went to the house of Rama Subba Reddy to fix up the

marriage date of the brother of the deceased. The marriage

date was fixed as 31.01.1996.       Then all of them went to

Venkateswara Cloth shop and again from there, they went to

the medical shop of Raja Reddy and stayed there for

sometime.     Thereafter the deceased, PW-1 and Venkata

Subba Reddy went to Mithen hotel for drinking tea. At that

time, i.e. around 6.00 p.m., Venkata Subba Reddy left the

hotel to go to his village.      All of them consumed tea.

Thereafter, the deceased and PW-1 were going to Machupalle

bus stand through Madras road with a view to catch the bus

going to their village at about 6.30 p.m.




                                                         5
         With a view to take the cycle of Chinna Narsimha

Reddy who happened to be the proprietor of Ayyappa

Electricals, situated on the northern side of Madras road, they

went to the said electrical shop. When the deceased and PW-

1 were climbing the steps of the said electrical shop, A-8 who

is no more instigated the other accused and all the accused

surrounded the deceased and took out daggers from their

waists and stabbed the deceased. Finally the deceased fell in

front of Lepakshi Emporium, on the road margin. When the

deceased fell down, all the accused persons again stabbed the

deceased.    A-5 raised cries saying that "catch hold of that

fellow". PW-1 was frightened and ran to the northern lane of

the road. After sometime, PW1 came to the scene of offence

and saw the deceased lying dead with bleeding injuries all

over the body.    Thereafter, PW1 went to Cuddapah I Town

Police Station for giving the report.


         PW-6, the S.I. of Police, Cuddapah received an oral

statement of the incident from PW1 at about 7.20 p.m. He



                                                           6
reduced the oral statement into writing and took the signature

of PW1 on the statement. On the strength of the report given

by PW1, PW6 registered the case as Cr. No.207 of 1995

against the accused for offences punishable under Sections

147, 148 and 302 read with Section 149 IPC. The copies of

first information were sent to all concerned. At about 9.30

p.m. PW-6 visited the scene of offence and recorded the

statements of PWs 1 to 3 and others.     PW6 collected MO-1

dagger and MO-2 right leg shoe from the scene of offence.


           On 26.12.1995 PW7 the CI of Police, Cuddapah, held

inquest over the dead body of the deceased in the presence of

PW-5 and others. Ex. P-3 is the inquest report.


           On 26.12.1995, PW-4, the Civil Assistant Surgeon,

District   Headquarters    Hospital   Cuddapah    received       a

requisition from the Station House Officer, I Town Police

Station, Cuddapah to conduct autopsy over the dead body of

the deceased. He commenced the autopsy on the dead body

of the deceased at about 12.40 P.M. and opined that the


                                                             7
deceased died because of multiple injuries and the injuries to

vital organs.    According to the observation, he issued post

mortem certificate Ex.P-2.


          PW-7, the CI of Police, Cuddapah, arrested the

accused at Padagalapalli bus stop on 04.01.1996 at 10.30

a.m. Thus, on completion of investigation, he filed the charge

sheet on 12.04.1996.


          The defence of the accused was of total denial. It is

also suggested by the accused by way of defence that the

incident did not take place in the manner suggested by the

prosecution.


          In    order   to   substantiate   the   accusation,   the

prosecution examined PWs 1 to 7.            They produced certain

documents and they were marked as Exs. P-1 to P-18,

whereas the accused examined DW-1 and 2 and they

produced certain documents and they were marked as Ex.D1

and D2.


                                                                8
           P.Ws. 1 and 2 are stated to be eye-witnesses to the

occurrence.     As noted above, the evidence of the eye-

witnesses was found to be credible, cogent and reliable and on

that basis, conviction was recorded. The respondents filed an

appeal before the High Court. By the impugned judgment, the

High Court found that the respondents were responsible for

the death of the deceased but held that in the absence of

charge under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC, they

could not have been convicted under Section 302 IPC, but

held that each would be liable for conviction for the offence

punishable under Section 326 IPC. Sentence of five years RI

and a fine of Rs.1,000/- with default stipulations was

imposed.


5.         Learned counsel for the appellant in each case

submitted that the approach of the High Court is clearly

erroneous. It is submitted that if the accused persons could

not have been convicted under Section 302 with the aid of

Section 149 IPC, they could not have also been convicted for



                                                           9
offence punishable under Section 326 IPC simplicitor.        It is

pointed out that the charges framed clearly related to the

offence punishable under Section 149, though there was no

specific mention of the provision. It is also submitted that no

prejudice has been caused to the accused because of the non

mention of the provision. In fact, the essence of Section 149

IPC was clearly spelt out while framing charge.


6.       Learned    counsel    for   the     accused-respondents

supported the impugned judgment of the High Court and

additionally submitted that this is a case for acquittal and the

evidence of PWs. 1 and 2 should not have been acted upon.


7.       This Court, in the oft repeated case of Willie (William)

Slaney Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (1955 (2) SCR 1140) had

highlighted the aspect of prejudice.       This decision has been

referred to in a large number of subsequent cases dealing with

the question of prejudice in the background of Section 464 of

the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short `the Code'). In

Ramkishan and Ors. Vs. State of Rajasthan (1997 (7) SCC


                                                              10
518), it was noted as follows:


                       "In view of the findings recorded by the
              learned Sessions Judge and the material on
              record, we are unable to ascribe to the finding
              that the appellants' intention was to cause
              death of Bhura deceased. The finding betrays
              the observation of the trial court as noticed
              above. The medical evidence also does not
              support the ultimate finding recorded by the
              trial court and upheld by the High Court. The
              offence     in the established facts and
              circumstances of the case in the case of the
              appellants would only fall under Section 304
              Part II IPC read with Section 149 IPC and not
              under Section 302 IPC. Indeed no specific
              charge indicating the applicability of Section
              149 IPC was framed, but all the ingredients of
              Section 149 IPC were clearly indicated in the
              charge framed against the appellants and as
              held by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
              Willie (William) Slaney Vs. State of M.P. the
              omission to mention Section 149 IPC
              specifically in the charge is only an irregularity
              and since no prejudice is shown to have been
              caused to the appellants by that omission it
              cannot affect their conviction."

8.       Similar view was also taken in B.N. Srikantiah and

Ors. Vs. The State of Mysore (1959 SCR 496) in the

background of Section 34, viz-a-viz Section 149, IPC.               In

Dalbir Singh Vs. State of U.P. (2004 (5) SCC 334), it was noted

as follows.


                                                                   11
          "15.     In Willie (William) Slaney Vs.
State of M.P. a Constitution Bench examined
the question of absence of charge in
considerable detail. The observations made in
paras 6 and 7, which are of general
application, are being reproduced below:(AIR P
121 6)

        "6.       Before we proceed to set out
our answer and examine the provisions of the
Code, we will pause to observe that the Code
is a Code of procedure and, like all procedural
laws, is designed to further the ends of justice
and not to frustrate them by the introduction
of endless technicalities. The object of the
Code is to ensure that an accused person gets
a full and fair trial along certain well
established and well-understood lines that
accord with our notions of natural justice.

          If he does, if he is tried by a competent
court, if he is told and clearly understands the
nature of the offence for which he is being
tried, if the case against him is fully and fairly
explained to him and he is afforded a full
and fair opportunity of defending himself,
then,       provided     there     is   'substantial'
compliance with the outward forms of the law,
mere        mistakes      in    procedure,     mere
inconsequential errors and omissions in the
trial are regarded as venal by the Code and
the trial is not vitiated unless the accused can
show substantial prejudice.           That, broadly
speaking, is the basic principle on which the
Code is based.

7.        Now, here, as in all procedural laws,
certain things are regarded as vital. Disregard
of a provision of that nature is fatal to the trial


                                                        12
and at once invalidates the conviction. Others
are not vital and whatever the irregularity they
can be cured; and in that event the conviction
must stand unless the Court is satisfied that
there was prejudice. Some of these matters
are dealt with by the Code and wherever that
is the case full effect must be given to its
provisions.

15.1After analysing the provisions of Sections
  225, 232, 535 and 537 of the Code of
  Criminal Procedure, 1898 which correspond
  to Sections 215, 464(2), 464 and 465 of the
  1973 Code, the Court held as under in para
  44 of the Report: (AIR p.128)


     "44.Now, as we have said, Sections 225,
     232, 535 and 537(a) between them, cover
     every conceivable type of error and
     irregularity referable to a charge that can
     possibly arise, ranging from cases in
     which there is a conviction with no
     charge at all from start to finish down to
     cases in which there is a charge but with
     errors, irregularities and omissions in it.
     The code is emphatic that 'whatever' the
     irregularity it is not to be regarded as
     fatal unless there is prejudice.

          It is the substance that we must
seek. Courts have to administer justice and
justice includes the punishment of guilt just
as much as the protection of innocence.
Neither can be done if the shadow is mistaken
for the substance and the goal is lost in a
labyrinth of unsubstantial technicalities.
Broad vision is required, a nice balancing of
the rights of the State and the protection of
society in general against protection from
harassment to the individual and the risks of


                                                   13
unjust conviction.

         Every reasonable presumption must
be made in favour of an accused person; he
must be given the benefit of every reasonable
doubt.
The same broad principles of justice and fair
play must be brought to bear when
determining a matter of prejudice as in
adjudging guilt. But when all is said and done
what we are concerned to see is whether the
accused had a fair trial, whether he knew what
he was being tried for, whether the main facts
sought to be established against him were
explained to him fairly and clearly and
whether he was given a full and fair chance to
defend himself.

         If all these elements are there and no
prejudice is shown the conviction must stand
whatever the irregularities whether traceable
to the charge or to a want of one."

16.      This question was again examined by
a three Judge Bench in Gurbachan Singh Vs.
State of Punjab in which it was held as under:
(AIR p.626, para 7)

               "In judging a question of
     prejudice, as of guilt, courts must act
     with a broad vision and look to the
     substance and not to technicalities, and
     their main concern should be to see
     whether the accused had a fair trial,
     whether he knew what he was being tried
     for, whether the main facts sought to be
     established against him were explained
     to him fairly and clearly and whether he
     was given a full and fair chance to defend
     himself."


                                                  14
          17.       There are a catena of decisions of this
          Court on the same lines and it is not
          necessary to burden this judgment by making
          reference to each one of them. Therefore, in
          view of Section 464 Cr.P.C., it is possible for
          the appellate or revisional court to convict an
          accused for an offence for which no charge
          was framed unless the Court is of the opinion
          that a failure of justice would in fact occasion.
          In order to judge whether a failure of justice
          has been occasioned, it will be relevant to
          examine whether the accused was aware of
          the basic ingredients of the offence for which
          he is being convicted and whether main facts
          sought to be established against him were
          explained to him clearly and whether he got a
          fair chance to defend himself."


9.       The High Court, as has been rightly pointed out by

learned counsel for the appellant, lost sight of the fact that if

its view is accepted in the absence of charge under Section

149, conviction in terms of Section 326 could not have been

done.


10.      The High Court appears to have misconstrued the

decision of this Court in Rewa Ram Vs. Teja and Ors. (AIR

1998 SC 2883). In that case, the High Court held that the

accused persons could be held guilty only under Section 326

IPC, particularly, when it was stated in the charge that their



                                                              15
common object was to assault the deceased and commit

rioting with deadly weapons. The position is entirely different

here. In fact, while framing charge and combined reading of

charge No.1 and charge No.3 makes it clear, that the Court

specified that the accused persons were members of unlawful

assembly and in prosecution of the common object of such

assembly, i.e, in order to commit murder of the deceased,

committed the offence and at that time they were armed with

daggers etc. to bring in the application of Section 148 IPC. In

Charge No.3, there is a specific reference to the transactions,

as mentioned in the first charge, and the object to commit

murder by hacking on the body of the deceased with daggers

and causing his intentional death and thereby committing

offence punishable under Section 302 IPC. Therefore, the

charge in relation to offence punishable under Section 149

IPC is not only implicit but also patent in the charges.


11.      Apart from the question of prejudice, this aspect has

also been lost sight of by the High Court.



                                                           16
12.      The inevitable result is that the appeals deserve to be

allowed, and we direct so.     The judgment of the Trial Court

stands restored and that of the High Court stands set aside.

The respondents shall surrender to custody forthwith to suffer

remainder of sentence, if any.


                             .............................................J.
                             (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                                                             ......
                             .......................................J.
                             (P. SATHASIVAM)


                                                                         .........
                           ....................................J.
                           (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)
New Delhi,
July 14, 2008




                                                                               17

