
Supreme Court of India
Vinay Kumar vs New India Assurance Co.Ltd on 9 May, 2008Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, P.P. Naolekar
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.3473 OF 2008
                      (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.9523 of 2007)


Vinay Kumar                                              ...Appellant(s)

                                        Versus

New India Assurance Co. Ltd.                  ...Respondent(s)



                                    O R D E R

          Heard learned counsel for the parties.
          Leave granted.
          The District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum [for short, `the District
Forum'] dismissed the complaint against which order when appeal was preferred
before the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission [for short, 'the State
Commission'], it recorded a finding that adequate opportunity was not afforded to
the complainant to file requisite documents, but after recording the said finding,
instead of remitting the matter to the District Forum, it simply allowed the appeal and
directed that the complainant may file fresh complaint, subject to the law of
limitation. The said order has been confirmed in revision by the National Consumer
Disputes Redressal Commission. Hence, this appeal by special leave.
                                                                                  ....2/-
                                         -2-
          In our view, in view of the finding recorded by the State Commission that
adequate opportunity was not given to the complainant to produce documents, after
allowing the appeal, the matter should have been remitted to the District Forum.
          Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, impugned orders are set aside and the
matter is remitted to the District Forum to decide the complaint afresh on merits in
accordance with law after giving opportunity of hearing to the parties.

                                                                          ......................J.
                                               [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                          ......................J.
                                               [G.S. SINGHVI]
New Delhi,
May 09, 2008.

