
Supreme Court of India
C.C.T. Orissa &amp; Ors vs Indian Explosives Ltd on 28 February, 2008Author: . Arijit Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, C.K. Thakker, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
                                                       REPORTABLE

             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

               CIVIL APPEAL No. 5123 OF 2005


C.C.T. Orissa &amp; Ors.                             ...Appellants

                       Versus

Indian Explosives Ltd.                           ...Respondent



                         JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J



1.   Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division

Bench of the Orissa High Court allowing the writ petition filed

by the respondent (hereinafter referred to as the `assessee').



2.   Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
     The assessee is registered as a dealer under the Orissa

Sales Tax, Act, 1947 (in short the `Act') and the Orissa Sales

Tax Rules, 1947 (in short the `Rules').   For the assessment

year, 2000-2001 the assessee filed consolidated return under

Section 11 of the Act before the Assistant Commissioner of

Sales Tax, Sundergarh Range, Rourkela (Assessment). In the

said return the assessee claimed that it had purchased goods

including Ammonium Nitrate which was specified in its

Certificate of Registration as being intended for use in the

manufacture of goods for sale by furnishing declaration to that

effect in Form IV to the seller of such goods and 4% on the

value of such goods purchased by the Assessee was paid by it

as provided in Entry 48 of the Notification issued under

Section 5(1) of the Act.    The claim was accepted by the

Assistant Commissioner of Sales Tax Sundergarh Range,

Rourkela (Assessment). Subsequently the said authority

initiated proceedings for re assessment under Section 12(8) of

the Act. The same was dropped, and instead a show cause

notice under Section 23(4)(a) of the Act read with Rule 80 of

the Rules was issued by the Commissioner of Sales Tax on

                             2
14.1.2004.    Assessee challenged the said show cause notice

by filing the writ application.       With reference to various

decisions of this Court it was submitted that the notice was

without jurisdiction. It was submitted that a plain reading of

both Entry 48 of the Notification issued under Section 5(1) of

the Act and 5th Proviso to Section 5(1) to the Act shows that

the goods specified in the Certificate of Registration and

purchased by a dealer must only be used in the manufacture

of goods     inside   the   State   of Orissa   and   such   goods

manufactured may be also intermediate products used in

further manufacture of furnished goods for sale inside or

outside the State of Orissa.


     The Revenue filed its counter affidavit. When the writ

petition was taken up for hearing,       it was pointed out that

disputed questions of fact arise for decision which can be

adjudicated by the authorities under the Act and the High

Court should not exercise power under Article 226 of the

Constitution.   It was also submitted that the interpretation

given by the assessee was not correct. It was pointed out that

                                3
in the case of M/s ICI Ltd., a subsidiary of the respondent-

assessee, a Division Bench had clearly rejected a similar plea.

The High Court was of the view that the writ petition can be

entertained even though an alternative remedy is available.

Accepting the stand of the assessee the High Court held that

the notice issued was to be quashed and accordingly quashed

the impugned notice dated 14.1.2004.


3.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

High Court ought not to have entertained the writ petition

more particularly when for the assessment year 1997-98 and

1998-99 another Division Bench in Writ Petition Nos. OJC

Nos. 16928 of 1998 and 1500 of 2000 had rejected the stand

of the assessee. Though it was brought to the notice of the

High Court that such is the position, unfortunately the High

Court did not even refer to the said decision.



4.   It is pointed out that in the counter affidavit filed before

the High Court, at para 9, specific reference has been made to




                              4
the judgment dated 9.10.2001 that in the aforesaid two writ

petitions similar stand had been rejected.



5.   It is pointed out that this Court in ICI India Ltd. v. State

of Orissa (2007 (10) SCR 433) has upheld the view expressed

by the High Court in OJC Nos.16928 of 1998 and 1500 of

2000.


6.   There is no appearance on behalf of respondent-assessee

when the matter was called.


7.   The High Court seems to have completely lost sight of the

parameters highlighted by this Court in a large number of

cases   relating   to   exhaustion    of     alternative   remedy.

Additionally the High Court did not even refer to the judgment

of another Division Bench for the assessment years, 1997-98

and Assessment years 1998-99 in respect of ICI India Ltd. In

any event the High Court ought to have referred to the ratio of

the decision in the said case. That judicial discipline has not




                              5
been adhered to. Looked at from any angle, the High Court's

judgment is indefensible and is set aside.



8.   The respondent-assessee shall, within a period of eight

weeks from today, file its response, if any, to the show cause

notice dated 14.1.2004. The Commissioner shall consider the

reply to the show cause notice filed, if any, and dispose of the

proceeding in accordance with law.


9.   The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent without any

order as to costs.


                          ..........................................J.
                          (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                          ..........................................J.
                          (C.K. THAKKER)


                          ..........................................J.
                          (LOKESHWAR SINGH PANTA)
New Delhi,
February 28, 2008




                               6

