
Supreme Court of India
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 April, 2008Author: . Arijit Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, C.K. Thakker
           CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  265 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Ashoka Kumar Thakur

RESPONDENT:
Union of India and Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/04/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; C.K. THAKKER

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 265 OF 2006
(With WP (C) Nos. 269/2006, 598/2006, 29/2007, 35/2007, 
53/2007 Contempt Petition (C)No.112/2007 in WP ) 
No.265/2006, 336/2007, 313/2007, 335/2007, 231/2007, 
425/2007 and 428/2007)



Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J

1.	The issues involved in the present writ petitions have far 
reaching consequences and in essence pose several questions 
of seminal importance. In essence, they raise questions which 
have no easy answers. The complexity can be gauged from the 
fact that on one hand the petitioners have questioned the logic 
of providing reservations/quotas for a class of people whom 
they described as "unidentifiable" or "undetermined" while the 
respondents justify their action by labelling them as measures 
taken for upliftment of vast majority of people who have 
suffered social humiliation and sneer for the social 
backwardness. Complex questions like whether the 
expressions 'class' and 'castes' are synonyms, whether 
reservations provide the only solution for social empowerment 
measures, alleged lack of concern for the economically weaker 
group of citizens are some of the basic issues which need to be 
addressed. It has been emphatically highlighted by the 
petitioners that when the ultimate objective is classless and 
casteless in Indian democracy, there is no question of 
unendingly providing the reservation and that too without any 
definite data regarding backwardness. In essence, they 
contend that these measures perpetuate backwardness and do 
not remove them. On the epicenter of challenge is the Central 
Educational Institutions (Reservation in Admission) Act 2006 
(in short the 'Act') and the 93rd Amendment to the Constitution 
of India, 1950 (in short the 'Constitution'). Interestingly, both 
the petitioners and the respondents rely strongly on certain 
observations made by this Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of 
India 1992 (Suppl. 3) SCC 217 (commonly known as 'Indra 
Sawhney  No.1')  

2.	When the writ petitions were placed before a Bench of 
two Judges, considering the importance of the matter they 
were referred to be heard by a larger bench and certain 
questions which arise for consideration were formulated. That 
is how these cases are before this Bench. 

3.	Arguments have been advanced by both the sides as to 
whether Constitution contemplates casteless society. While the 
respondents submit that the Constitution really does not think 
of a casteless society, it prohibits untouchability in the 
background of Article 17. It has to be noted that both in 
Articles 15 and 16 the stress is on non-discrimination on the 
ground of castes. The Preamble of the Constitution also throws 
light on this aspect. Ultimately if the social status of a man 
goes in the higher direction because of his education, the 
difference in status gets obliterated. Education is a great 
levellor. In that sense, the ultimate object is that every Indian 
citizen should have the social status which is not inferior to 
another and that would be obliteration of the difference in 
status.  The ultimate objective is to see that no person gets 
discriminated because of his caste. If that be so, it would not 
be right to say that the ultimate objective is not the casteless 
society. 

4.	Various Articles of the Constitution of India and the 
Preamble provide an insight to the monumental document i.e. 
the Constitution of India. Article 14 guarantees equality before 
the law in addition to equal protection of law. Article 15(1) 
mandates that there shall not be any discrimination against 
any citizen on the grounds of religion, caste, sex, race, or place 
of birth.  Article 16(1) makes the fundamental right of equality 
specific relating to job opportunities.  Article 16(2) significantly 
speaks of government employment by providing that no citizen 
shall be ineligible only on the grounds of religion, race, caste, 
sex, descent, place of birth or any of them or discriminated 
against in respect of any employment or office under the State.  
Article 16(4) is an important provision which empowers the 
State permitting the provision for the reservation of 
appointments and posts in favour of any backward class of 
citizens which in the opinion of the State is not adequately 
represented in the services of the State. The stress is on 
backwardness of the citizens and inadequate representation in 
the services under the State.  

5.	If one takes a walk on the pathway relating to the views 
expressed by this Court in the matter of reservation or quotas 
for the other backward classes one comes across many 
milestones. Some of them were noted extensively in Indra 
Sawhney No.1. They are: The State of Madras v. Sm. 
Champakam Dorairajan &amp; Anr. (AIR 1951 SC 226),  Minor A 
Peeriakaruppan v. Sobha Joseph (1971 (1) SCC 38), The State 
of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. v. U.S.V. Balram, etc. (1972 (1) 
SCC 660),  Shri Janki Prasad Parimoo and Ors. v. State of 
Jammu and Kashmir and Ors. (1973(1) SCC 420), State of 
Uttar Pradesh and Ors. v. Pradip Tandon and Ors. (1975 (1) 
SCC 267), State of Kerala and Anr. v. N.M. Thomas and Ors. 
(1976(2) SCC 310), Kumari K.S. Jayashree and Anr. v. The 
State of Kerala and Anr. (1976 (3) SCC 730), K.C. Vasanth 
Kumar and Anr. v. State of Karnataka (1985 (Supp) SCC 714) 
and Indra Sawhney v. Union of India and Ors. (2000 (1) SCC 
168) (known as Indra Sawhney No.2).  

6.	Two recent decisions have also been highlighted by the 
parties. They are M. Nagaraj and Ors. v. Union of India and 
Ors. (2006 (8) SCC 212) and Nair Service Society v. State of 
Kerala (2007 (4) SCC 1). It is to be noted that some of the 
arguments which have been raised relate to broad principles of 
law and the jurisprudential approach. They are the 
applicability of the foreign decisions, more particularly, the 
decisions of the American Courts. They relate to the principles 
of  strict scrutiny and narrow tailoring. 

7.	Learned counsel for the petitioners have stressed on 
these decisions to show as to what should be the approach in 
matters relating to social empowerment. Learned counsel for 
the respondents have however submitted that the approach is 
to be different because the problems before the American 
Courts essentially related to individual rights while the Indian 
Courts are more concerned with group rights i.e. rights of 
class of citizens. We shall deal with this in some length later. 

8.	The other issue which was hotly contested related to the 
exclusion of the creamy layer. 

9.	One of the major challenges raised by the petitioners is 
based on the allegation that there is no acceptable data for 
fixing the percentage of other backward classes. This has been 
highlighted to show that there is no rational basis for fixing 
the percentage of reservation at 27% for the other backward 
classes. It is pointed out that the figures appear to have been 
culled out from some survey done more than seven decades 
back i.e. 1931 to be precise. Thereafter, there seems to be no 
definite data to know the actual percentage. It is pointed out 
that in Indra Sawhney No.1 (supra) this Court had laid 
considerable stress on having a Commission to identify and 
determine the criteria for determining the socially and 
educationally backward classes. Very little appears to have 
been done.  It is surprising, it was contended, that there has 
been not even a single case of exclusion but on the other hand 
more than 250 new castes/sub-castes have been added. This 
shows that there is really no serious attempt to identify the 
other backward classes. On the other hand, there has been 
over-jealous anxiety to include more number of people so that  
they can get the benefits  of reservations/quotas and this has 
been  termed as "vote bank politics". It is highlighted that even 
when a serious matter relating to adoption of the Act was 
under consideration there was hardly any discussion and 
every political party was exhibiting its anxiety to get the 
Statute passed. Crocodile tears were shed to show lip 
sympathy for the backwardness of the people. In reality, the 
object  was to give a wrong impression to the people that they 
were concerned about the backwardness of the people and 
they were the 'Messiahs' of the poor and the down trodden. In 
reality, in their hearts the ultimate object was to grab more 
votes. The lack of seriousness of the debate exhibits that the 
debate was nothing but a red-herring to divert attention from 
the sinister, politically motivated design masked by the 
"tearful" faces of the people masquerading  as champions of 
the poor and down trodden. It is pointed out that contrary to 
what was being projected by the parties when the discussions 
were going on, in an impassioned speech by late Rajeev 
Gandhi who was the leader of opposition at an earlier point of 
time, the fallacies in adopting the Mandal Report were 
highlighted.  It is surprising, it is submitted, that those very 
people who were the champions of anti-reservation and anti- 
quota as members of opposition, have done summersault and 
were saying just the opposite. It is pointed out that when one 
member Shri P.C. Alexandar exhibited real courage and 
highlighted the fallacies in the stand taken, his view appears 
to have been lightly brushed aside and the Statute hustled 
through.  It is also submitted that the objectivity and sanctity 
of the report submitted in the Parliament commonly known as 
"Oversight Committee Report" has been lightly brushed aside. 
This only indicates that there was no serious debate about the 
consequences. The foresight of late Rajiv Gandhi in saying that 
the country will be divided on caste basis and that would lead 
to disaster has been prophetically proved to be correct and it 
is a reality.  It is submitted that the enactment has created a 
sharp divide amongst the citizens of the country and it has not 
even an iota of good results flowing from it. On the contrary, 
the country will be divided sharply leading to social unrest and 
caste-wars. It is pointed out that in the recent past such caste 
wars have resulted in large scale loss of life and destruction of 
public properties. 

10.	The relevance of the parliamentary debate or the speech 
of the Minister has been highlighted by this Court in many 
cases. It is a settled position in law that there can be only 
limited use of the parliamentary debate. The Courts should 
not normally critically analyse the proceedings of Parliament. 
This flows from a very fundamental aspect i.e. mutual respect 
of the Parliament and the Judiciary for each other. Each of 
these great institutions in a democracy operates in different 
fields. It is not expected that one wing of democracy would 
criticize the manner of functioning of another wing. That 
would be against the basic desirability of mutual respect.  Any 
opinion or comment or criticism about the manner of 
functioning of one by the other would be not only undesirable 
but imperatively avoidable. The citizens of this country expect 
a great deal from the Parliament and the Judiciary. It is but 
natural that the people of this country would be disappointed 
and dis-heartened and their hopes  will be shattered if instead 
of showing respect for each other, there is mudslinging, 
unwanted criticism or impermissible criticism about the 
manner of functioning or the rationale of a decision or a view 
taken. In this context, it would be relevant to take note of what 
this Court said in Builders Association of India v. Union of 
India and Ors. (1995 Supp (1)  SCC 41), and K. Nagaraj and 
Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Anr. (1985 (1) SCC 523).  
In State of Mysore v. R.V. Bidap (1974 (3) SCC 337), it was 
observed as follows:
"5. Anglo-American jurisprudence, unlike other 
systems, has generally frowned upon the use 
of parliamentary debates and press 
discussions as throwing light upon the 
meaning of statutory provisions. Willes, J. in 
Miller v. Tayler, [1769] 4 Burri, 2303, 2332., 
stated that the sense and meaning of an Act of 
Parliament must be collected from what it says 
when passed into law, and not from the history 
of changes it underwent in the House where it 
took its rise. That history is not known to the 
other House or to the Sovereign. In Assam 
Railways and Trading Company Ltd. v. I.R.C., 
[1935] A.C. 445 at p. 458, Lord Writ in the 
Privy Council said :
"It is clear that the language of a 
Minister of the Crown in proposing 
in Parliament a measure which 
eventually becomes law is 
inadmissible and the report of 
commissioners is even more 
removed from value as evidence of 
intention, because it does not follow 
that their recommendations were 
accepted."

The rule of grammatical construction has been 
accepted in India before and after 
Independence. In the State of Travancore-
Cochin and Ors. v. Bombay Company Ltd., 
Alleppey, (AIR 1952 S.C. 366), Chief Justice 
Patanjali Sastri delivering the judgment of the 
Court, said :-
"It remains only to point out that 
the use made by the learned Judges 
below of the speeches made by the 
members of the Constituent 
Assembly in the course of the 
debates on the draft Constitution is 
unwarranted. That this form of 
extrinsic aid to the interpretation of 
statutes is not admissible has been 
generally accepted in England, and 
the same rule has been observed in 
the construction of Indian statutes-
see Administrator-General of Bengal 
v. Prem Lal Mullick, 22 Ind. Appl. 
107 (P.C.) at p. 118. The reason 
behind the rule was explained by 
one of us in Gopalan v. State of 
Madras, (1950) S.C.R. 88 thus :
A speech made in the course of 
the debate on a bill could at best 
be indicative of the subjective 
intent of the speaker, but it 
could not reflect the inarticulate 
mental process lying behind the 
majority vote which carried the 
bill. Nor is it reasonable to 
assume that the minds of all 
those legislators were in accord".

Or, as it is more tersely put in an American case-
"Those who did not speak may not have 
agreed with those who did; and those 
who spoke might differ from each other-
United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight 
Association, (1897) 169 U.S. 290 at p. 
318 (sic).
This rule of exclusion has not always 
been adhered to in America, and 
sometimes distinction is made between 
using such material to ascertain the 
purpose of a statute and using it for 
ascertaining its meaning. It would seem 
that the rule is adopted in Canada and 
Australia-see Craies on Statute Law, 5th 
Edn. p. 122 (pp. 368-9)".

11.	In the American jurisdiction, a more natural note has 
sometimes been struck. Mr. Justice Frankfurter was of the 
view that-
"If the purpose of construction is the 
ascertainment of meaning, nothing that is 
logically relevant should be excluded, and 
yet, the Rule of Exclusion, which is 
generally followed in England, insists that, 
in interpreting statutes, the proceedings in 
the Legislatures, including speeches 
delivered when the statute was discussed 
and adopted, cannot be cited in courts."

12.	Crawford on Statutory Construction at page 388 notes 
that-

"The judicial opinion on this point is 
certainly not quite uniform and there 
are American decisions to the effect 
that the general history of a statute 
and the various steps leading up to an 
enactment including amendments or 
modifications of the original bill and 
reports of Legislative Committees can 
be looked at for ascertaining the 
intention of the legislature where it is 
in doubt; but they hold definitely that 
the legislative history is inadmissible 
when there is no obscurity in the 
meaning of the statute."

The Rule of Exclusion has been criticised by 
jurists as artificial. The trend of academic 
opinion and the practice in the European 
system suggest that interpretation of a statute 
being an exercise in the ascertainment of 
meaning, everything which is logically relevant 
should be admissible. Recently, an eminent 
Indian jurist has reviewed the legal position 
and expressed his agreement with Julius 
Stone and Justice Frankfurter. Of course, 
nobody suggests that such extrinsic materials 
should be decisive but they must be 
admissible. Authorship and interpretation 
must mutually illumine and interact. There is 
authority for the proposition that resort may 
be had to these sources with great caution and 
only when incongruities and ambiguities are to 
be resolved. A.K. Gopalan v. State of Madras 
(1950 SCR 88). There is a strong case for 
whittling down the Rule of Exclusion followed 
in the British courts and for less apologetic 
reference to legislative proceedings and like 
materials to read the meaning of the words of a 
statute. Where it is plain, the language 
prevails, but where there is obscurity or lack of 
harmony with other provisions and in other 
special circumstances, it may be legitimate to 
take external assistance such as the object of 
the provisions, the mischief sought to be 
remedied, the social context, the words of the 
authors and other allied matters. The law of 
statutory construction is a strategic branch of 
jurisprudence which must, it may be felt, 
respond to the great social changes but a 
conclusive pronouncement on the particular 
point arising here need not detain us because 
nothing decisive as between the alternative 
interpretations flows from a reliance on the 
Constituent Assembly proceedings or the 
broad purposes of the statutory scheme.

13.	One thing however needs to be noted here that mere 
short length of debate cannot and does not become a ground 
for  invalidity of the decision and the reverse is also not true. 

14.	Elaborate arguments have been advanced about the 
applicability of the foreign decisions, more particularly, the 
American Courts. It is to be noted that the American cases 
which have been highlighted by the petitioners relate  
essentially to strict classification, strict scrutiny and narrow 
tailoring. This issue is of considerable importance when so 
much debate is taking place about respect being shown by 
courts of a country to a decision of another country. The 
factual scenario and the basic issues involved in the cases  
sometimes throw light on the controversy. It has been rightly 
contended by Mr. Vahanvati and Mr. Gopal Subramanium 
that there is a conceptual difference between the cases decided 
by the American Supreme Court and the cases at hand. In 
Saurabh Chaudri and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. (2003 
(11) SCC 146) it was held that the logic of strict classification 
and strict scrutiny  does not have much relevance in the cases 
of the nature at hand. If one looks at the different Statutes in 
India,  Article 14 of the Constitution is conceptually different 
from 14th Amendment to the American Constitution as was 
noted in State of West Bengal vs. Anwar Ali Sarkar (1952 SCR 
284) and State of Bombay and Anr. v. F.N. Balsara (1952 SCR 
682).  In Anwar Ali's case (supra) at pages 363 and 364 it was 
noted as follows: 
"I find it impossible to read these portions of 
the Constitution without regard to the 
background out of which they arose. I cannot 
blot out their history and omit from 
consideration the brooding spirit of the times. 
They are not just dull, lifeless words static and 
hide- bound as in some mummified 
manuscript, but, living flames intended to give 
life to a great nation and order its being, 
tongues of dynamic fire, potent to mould the 
future as well as guide the present. The 
Constitution must, in my judgment, be left 
elastic enough to meet from time to time the 
altering conditions of a changing world with its 
shifting emphasis and differing needs. I feel 
therefore that in each case judges must look 
straight into the heart of things and regard the 
facts of each case concretely much as a jury 
would do; and yet, not quite as a jury, for we 
are considering here a matter of law and not 
just one of fact; Do these "laws" which have 
been called in question offend a still greater 
law before which even they must bow? 
99. Doing that, what is the history of these 
provisions? They arose out of the fight for 
freedom in this land and are but the 
endeavour to compress into a few pregnant 
phrases some of the main attributes of a 
sovereign democratic republic as seen through 
Indian eyes. There was present to the collective 
mind of the Constituent Assembly, reflecting 
the mood of the peoples of India, the memory 
of grim trials by hastily constituted tribunals 
with novel forms of procedure set forth in 
Ordinances promulgated in haste because of 
what was then felt to be the urgent necessities 
of the moment. Without casting the slightest 
reflection of the judges and the Courts so 
constituted, the fact remains that when these 
tribunals were declared invalid and the same 
persons were retired in the ordinary Courts, 
many were acquitted, many who had been 
sentenced to death were absolved. That was 
not the fault of the judges but of the imperfect 
tools with which they were compelled to work. 
The whole proceedings were repugnant to the 
peoples of this land, and to my mind, article 
14 is but a reflex of this mood. 
100. What I am concerned to see is not 
whether there is absolute equality in any 
academical sense of the term but whether the 
collective conscience of a sovereign democratic 
republic can regard the impugned law, 
contrasted with the ordinary law of the land, 
as the sort of substantially equal treatment 
which men of resolute minds and unbiased 
views can regard as right and proper in a 
democracy of the kind we have proclaimed 
ourselves to be. Such views must take into 
consideration the practical necessities of 
government, the right to alter the laws and 
many other facts, but in the forefront must 
remain the freedom of the individual from 
unjust and unequal treatment, unequal in the 
broad sense in which a democracy would view 
it. In my opinion, 'law' as used in Article 14 
does not mean the "legal precepts which are 
actually recognised and applied in tribunals of 
a given time and place" but "the more general 
body of doctrine and tradition from which 
those precepts are chiefly drawn, and by which 
we criticise, them."  

15.	It needs  no emphasis that the formal equality concept 
came to be recognized in U.S.A. after about 10 years of its 
inception. In the first phase of the U.S.A. Constitutional Law 
there was only affirmative action but in the Indian 
Constitution right from the beginning affirmative action has 
been provided, for example, provisions made for Scheduled 
Castes and Schedules Tribes.  A distinction has been noted in 
para 640 of Indra Sawhney  No.1.  Articles 38(1) and 38(2) 
read with Article 46 of the Constitution make the position  
clear that the State is charged with the duty to secure 
interests of the weaker sections of the people and minimize the 
inequalities in income. The Constitution from its inception 
contained Article 17 which abolishes untouchability.

16.	In this context  the following paras need to be noted.
17.	In Minerva  Mills Ltd. and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. 
(1980) 3 SCC 625)  in para 63 it was held as follows:  

"63.	The learned Attorney General argues that 
the State is under an obligation to take steps 
for promoting the welfare of the people by 
bringing about a social order in which social, 
economic and political justice shall inform all 
the institutions of the national life. He says 
that the deprivation of some of the 
fundamental rights for the purpose of 
achieving this goal cannot possibly amount to 
a destruction of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. We are unable to accept this 
contention. The principles enunciated in Part 
IV are not the proclaimed monopoly of 
democracies alone. They are common to all 
polities, democratic or authoritarian. Every 
State is goal-oriented and claims to strive for 
securing the welfare of its people. The 
distinction between the different forms of 
Government consists in that a real democracy 
will endeavour to achieve its objectives through 
the discipline of fundamental freedoms like 
those conferred by Articles14 and 19.  Those 
are the most elementary freedoms without 
which a free democracy is impossible and 
which must therefore be preserved at all costs. 
Besides, as observed by Brandies, J., the need 
to protect liberty is the greatest when 
Government's purposes are beneficent. If the 
discipline of Article 14 is withdrawn and if 
immunity from the operation of that article is 
conferred, not only on laws passed by the 
Parliament but on laws passed by the State 
Legislatures also, the political pressures 
exercised by numerically large groups can tear 
the country asunder by leaving it to the 
legislature to pick and choose favoured areas 
and favourite classes for preferential 
treatment."

18.	In His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru v. 
State of Kerala and Anr.  (1973 (4) SCC 225) it was held as 
under:
"531. According to Mr. Palkhivala, the test of 
the true width of a power is not how probable 
it is that it may be exercised but what can 
possibly be done under it; that the abuse or 
misuse of power is entirely irrelevant; that the 
question of the extent of the power cannot be 
mixed up with the question of its exercise and 
that when the real question is as to the width 
of the power, expectation that it will never be 
used is as wholly irrelevant as an imminent 
danger of its use. The court does not decide 
what is the best and what is the worst. It 
merely decides what can possibly be done 
under a power if the words conferring it are so 
construed as to have an unbounded and 
limitless width, as claimed on behalf of the 
respondents.
532. It is difficult to accede to the submission 
on behalf of the respondents that while 
considering the consequences with reference to 
the width of an amending power contained in a 
Constitution any question of its abuse is 
involved. It is not for the courts to enter into 
the wisdom or policy of a particular provision 
in a Constitution or a statute. That is for the 
Constitution makers or for the parliament or 
the legislature. But that the real consequences 
can be taken into account while judging the 
width of the power is well settled. The Court 
cannot ignore the consequences to which a 
particular construction can lead while 
ascertaining the limits of the provisions 
granting the power. According to the learned 
Attorney General, the declaration in the 
preamble to our Constitution about the resolve 
of the people of India to constitute it into a 
Sovereign, Democratic Republic is only a 
declaration of an intention which was made in 
1947 and it is open to the amending body now 
under Article 368 to change the Sovereign 
Democratics Republic into some other kind of 
polity. This by itself shows the consequence of 
accepting the construction sought to be put on 
the material words in that article for finding 
out the ambit and width of the power conferred 
by   it."

19.	In Sajan Singh v. Maharashtra Sugar Mills Ltd. (AIR 
1965 SC 845) it was held as follows:
"6.	It is obvious that the fundamental rights 
enshrined in Part III are not included in the 
proviso, and so, if Parliament intends to 
amend any of the provisions contained in 
Articles 12 to 35 which are included in Part III, 
it is not necessary to take recourse to the 
proviso and to satisfy the additional 
requirements prescribed by it. Thus far, there 
is no difficulty. But in considering the scope of 
Art. 368, it is necessary to remember that Art. 
226, which is included in Chapter V of Part VI 
of the Constitution, is one of the constitutional 
provisions which fall under clause (b) of the 
proviso; and so, it is clear that if Parliament 
intends to amend the provisions of Art. 226, 
the bill proposing to make such an 
amendment must satisfy the requirements of 
the proviso. The question which calls for our 
decision is : what would be the requirement 
about making an amendment in a 
constitutional provision contained in Part III, if 
as a result of the said amendment, the powers 
conferred on the High Courts under Art. 226 
are likely to be affected? The petitioners 
contend that since it appears that the powers 
prescribed by Art. 226 are likely to be affected 
by the intended amendment of the provisions 
contained in Part III, the bill introduced for the 
purpose of making such an amendment, must 
attract the proviso, and as the impugned Act 
has admittedly not gone through the procedure 
prescribed by the proviso, it is invalid; and 
that raises the question about the construction 
of the provisions contained in Art. 368 and the 
relation between the substantive part of Art. 
368  with its proviso. 
8.	 On the other hand, if the substantive 
part of Art.  368 is very liberally and 
generously construed and it is held that even 
substantial modification of the fundamental 
rights which may make a very serious and 
substantial inroad on the powers of the High 
Courts under Art. 226 can be made without 
invoking the proviso, it may deprive clause (b) 
of the proviso of its substance. In other words, 
in construing both the parts of Art. 368, the 
rule of harmonious construction requires that 
if the direct effect of the amendment of 
fundamental rights is to make a substantial 
inroad on the High Courts' powers under Art. 
226, it would become necessary to consider 
whether the proviso would cover such a case 
or not. If the effect of the amendment made in 
the fundamental rights on the powers of the 
High Courts prescribed by Art. 226, is indirect, 
incidental, or is otherwise of an insignificant 
order, it may be that the proviso will not apply. 
The proviso would apply where the amendment 
in question seeks to make any change, inter 
alia, in Art. 226, and the question in such a 
case would be : does the amendment seek to 
make a change in the provisions of Art. 226? 
The answer to this question would depend 
upon the effect of the amendment made in the 
fundamental rights. 
9.	In dealing with constitutional questions 
of this character, courts generally adopt a test 
which is described as the pith and substance 
test. In Attorney-General for Ontario v. 
Reciprocal Insurers ([1924] A.C. 328), the Privy 
Council was called upon to consider the 
validity of the Reciprocal Insurance Act, 1922 
(12 &amp; 13 Geo. 5, Ont., c. 62) and s. 508c which 
had been added to the Criminal Code of 
Canada by ss. 7 &amp; 8 Geo. 5, c. 29 Dom. Mr. 
Justice Duff, who spoke for the Privy Council, 
observed that in an enquiry like the one with 
which the Privy Council was concerned in that 
case, "it has been formally laid down in 
judgments of this Board, that in such an 
inquiry the Courts must ascertain the 'true 
nature and character' of the enactment : 
Citizens' Insurance Co. of Canada v. Parsons 
([1881] 7 AC 96); its 'pith and substance' : 
Union Colliery Co. of British Columbia Ltd. v. 
Bryden ([1899] A.C. 580); and it is the result of 
this investigation, not the form alone, which 
the statute may have assumed under the hand 
of the draughtsman, that will determine within 
which of the categories of subject matters 
mentioned in ss. 91 and 92 the legislation 
falls; and for this purpose the legislation must 
be 'scrutinised in its entirety' : "Great West 
Saddlery Co. v. The King" ([1921] 2 A.C. 
91,117). It is not necessary to multiply 
authorities in support of the proposition that 
in considering the constitutional validity of the 
impugned Act, it would be relevant to inquire 
what the pith and substance of the impugned 
Act is. This legal position can be taken to be 
established by the decisions of this Court 
which have consistently adopted the view 
expressed by Justice Duff, to which we have 
just referred.
14.	 Thus, it would be seen that the genesis 
of the amendments made by Parliament in 
1951 by adding Articles 31A and 31B to the 
Constitution, clearly is to assist the State 
Legislatures in this country to give effect to the 
economic policy in which the party in power 
passionately believes to bring about much 
needed agrarian reform. It is with the same 
object that the second amendment was made 
by Parliament in 1955, and as we have just 
indicated, the object underlying the 
amendment made by the impugned Act is also 
the same. Parliament desires that agrarian 
reform in a broad and comprehensive sense 
must be introduced in the interests of a very 
large section of Indian citizens who live in 
villages and whose financial prospects are 
integrally connected with the pursuit of 
progressive agrarian policy. Thus, if the pith 
and substance test is applied to the 
amendment made by the impugned Act, it 
would be clear that Parliament is seeking to 
amend fundamental rights solely with the 
object of removing any possible obstacle in the 
fulfilment of the socio-economic policy in 
which the party in power believes. If that be so, 
the effect of the amendment on the area over 
which the High Courts' powers prescribed by 
Art. 226 operate, is incidental and in the 
present case can be described as of an 
insignificant order. The impugned Act does not 
purport to change the provisions of Art. 226 
and it cannot be said even to have that effect 
directly or in any appreciable measure. That is 
why we think that the argument that the 
impugned Act falls under the proviso, cannot 
be sustained. It is an Act the object of which is 
to amend the relevant Articles in Part III which 
confer fundamental rights on citizens and as 
such it falls under the substantive part of Art. 
368 and does not attract the provisions of 
clause (b) of the proviso. If the effect of the 
amendment made in the fundamental rights 
on Art. 226 is direct and not incidental and is 
of a very significant order, different 
considerations may perhaps arise. But in the 
present case, there is no occasion to entertain 
or weigh the said considerations. Therefore the 
main contention raised by the petitioners and 
the interveners against the validity of the 
impugned Act must be rejected." 

20.	In Kihoto Hollohan v. Zachillhu and Ors. (1992 Supp. (2) 
SCC 651) it was observed as follows:
"61. The propositions that fell for consideration 
in  Sankari Prasad	 Singh's and Sajjan  
Singh's	cases are  indeed different.   There 
the jurisdiction and power of the  Courts 
under Articles 136 and 226 were not sought to 
be taken	away nor  was there any change 
brought about in those  provisions either "in 
terms or in effect", since the very rights  which 
could  be adjudicated under and enforced by 
the Courts	were themselves taken away by 
the Constitution.  The result	 was that there 
was no area for the jurisdiction of the Courts 
to operate upon.  Matters are entirely different 
in the context of paragraph 7.  Indeed the 
aforesaid cases, by necessary implication 
support the point urged for the petitioners. The 
changes in Chapter IV of Part V and Chapter V 
of Part VI envisaged by the proviso need not be 
direct.	The change could be either "in terms 
of or in effect".	 It is	 not necessary to change 
the language of Articles 136 and 226 of the 
Constitution to attract the proviso.  If in effect 
these Articles  are  rendered ineffective  and  
made	inapplicable where  these articles 
could otherwise have been	 invoked  or 
would,	but  for  Paragraph 7, have operated  
there  is	 `in effect' a change in those 
provisions attracting the proviso. Indeed	this 
position was recognised in Sajjan Singh's	case 
(supra) where it was observed:
 "If  the  effect  of  the  amendment  
made  in	 the fundamental rights 
on Article 226 is direct and not  
incidental  and  is of a  very  
significant  order, different 
considerations may perhaps arise."
62.     In	 the  present cases, though the 
amendment  does not bring in any change 
directly in the language of Article 136, 226  
and  227	of  the Constitution,	however, in  
effect paragraph  7  curtails	the  operation 
of  those  Articles respecting matters falling 
under the Tenth Schedule.   There is a change 
in the effect in Article 136, 226 and 227 within 
the meaning of clause (b) of the proviso to 
Article 368(2). Paragraph 7, therefore,   
attracts	 the   proviso	 and ratification was 
necessary.  Accordingly, on Point B, we hold:
	 "That having regard to the 
background and evolution  of the 
principles underlying the Constitution 
(52nd  Amendment)  Act,  1985, in so 
far as  it  seeks  to introduce the Tenth 
Schedule in the Constitution of	 India, 
the provisions of Paragraph 7 of the  
Tenth  Schedule of the constitution in 
terms and in effect bring about	a 
change  in the operation  and  effect  to 
Articles  136, 226 and 227 of the  
Constitution  of	India and, therefore, 
the amendment would  require	 to be 
ratified in accordance with the  proviso  
to sub-Article (2) of Article 368 of the 
Constitution of India."

21.	In Shri Sarwan Singh and Anr. v. Shri Kasturi Lal (1977 
(1) SCC 750) it was observed as follows:
"20. Speaking generally, the object and 
purpose of a legislation assume greater 
relevance if the language of the law is obscure 
and ambiguous. But, it must be stated that we 
have referred to the object of the provisions 
newly introduced into the Delhi Rent Act in 
1975 not for seeking light from it for resolving 
in ambiguity, for there is none, but for a 
different purpose altogether. When two or more 
laws operate in the same field and each 
contains a non obstante clause stating that its 
provisions will override those of any other law, 
stimulating and incisive problems of 
interpretation arise. Since statutory 
interpretation has no conventional protocol, 
cases of such conflict have to be decided in 
reference to the object and purpose of the laws 
under consideration. A piquant situation, like 
the one before us, arose in Shri Ram Narain v. 
Simla Banking &amp; Industrial Co. Ltd. competing 
statutes being the Banking Companies Act, 
1949 as amended by Act 52 of 1953, and the 
Displaced Persons (Debts Adjustment) Act, 
1951. Section 45A of the Banking Companies 
Act, which was introduced by the amending 
Act of 1953, and Section 3 of the Displaced 
Persons Act 1951 contained such a non 
obstante clause, providing that certain 
provisions would have effect "notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in 
any other law for the time being in force". This 
Court resolved the conflict by considering the 
object and purpose of the two laws and giving 
precedence to the Banking Companies Act by 
observing : "It is, therefore, desirable to 
determine the overriding effect of one or the 
other of the relevant provisions in these two 
Acts, in a given case, on much broader 
considerations of the purpose and policy 
underlying the two Acts and the clear 
intendment conveyed by the language of the 
relevant provisions therein." (p. 615) As 
indicated by us, the special and specific 
purpose which motivated the enactment of 
Section 14A and Chapter IIIA of the Delhi Rent 
Act would be wholly frustrated if the provisions 
of the Slum Clearance Act requiring 
permission of the competent authority were to 
prevail over them. Therefore, the newly 
introduced provisions of the Delhi Rent Act 
must hold the field and be given full effect 
despite anything to the contrary contained in 
the Slum Clearance Act. 
21. For resolving such inter se conflicts, one 
other test may also be applied though the 
persuasive force of such a test is but one of the 
factors which combine to give a, fair meaning 
to the language of the law. That test is that the 
later enactment must prevail over the earlier 
one. Section 14A and Chapter IIIA having been 
enacted with effect from December 1, 1975 are 
later enactments in reference to Section 19 of 
the Slum Clearance Act which, in Its present 
form, was placed on the statute book with 
effect from February 28, 1965 and in reference 
to Section 39 of the same Act, which came into 
force in 1956 when the Act itself was passed. 
The legislature gave overriding effect to Section 
14A and Chapter IIIA with the knowledge that 
Sections 19 and 39 of the Slum Clearance Act 
contained non obstante clauses of equal 
efficacy. Therefore the later enactment must 
prevail over the former. The same test was 
mentioned with approval by this Court in Shri 
Ram Narain's case at page 615.
23. The argument of implied repeal has also no 
substance in it because our reason for 
according priority to the provisions of the Delhi 
Rent Act is not that the Slum Clearance Act 
stands impliedly repealed protanto. Bearing in 
mind the language of the two laws, their object 
and purpose, and the fact that one of them is 
later in point of time and was enacted with the 
knowledge of the non obstante clauses in the 
earlier law, we have come to the conclusion 
that the provisions of Section 14A and Chapter 
IIIA of the Rent Control Act must prevail over 
those contained in Sections 19 and 39 of the 
Slum Clearance Act. 

22.	In J.K. Cotton Spinning  and weaving co. Ltd. v. State of 
U.P. and Anr. (1961 (3) SCR 185)  it was observed as under:
"There will be complete harmony however if we 
hold instead that clause 5(a) will apply in all 
other cases of proposed dismissal or discharge 
except where an inquiry is pending within the 
meaning of clause 23. We reach the same 
result by applying another well known rule of 
construction that general provisions yield to 
special provisions. The learned Attorney-
General seemed to suggest that while this rule 
of construction is applicable to resolve the 
conflict between the general provision in one 
Act and the special provision in another Act, 
the rule cannot apply in resolving a conflict 
between general and special provisions in the 
same legislative instrument. This suggestion 
does not find support in either principle or 
authority. The rule that general provisions 
should yield to specific provisions is not an 
arbitrary principle made by lawyers and judges 
but springs from the common understanding 
of men and women that when the same person 
gives two directions one covering a large 
number of matters in general and another to 
only some of them his intention is that these 
latter directions should prevail as regards 
these while as regards all the rest the earlier 
direction should have effect. In Pretty v. Solly 
[(1859-53 ER 1032) (quoted in Craies on 
Statute Law at p. 205, 5th Edition) Romilly, M. 
R. mentioned the rule thus :- 
"The rule is, that whenever there is a 
particular enactment and a general 
enactment in the same statute and the 
latter, taken in its most comprehensive 
sense, would overrule the former, the 
particular enactment must be operative, 
and the general enactment must be taken 
to affect only the other parts of the statute 
to which it may properly apply". The rule 
has been applied as between different 
provisions of the same statute in 
numerous cases some of which only need 
be mentioned : De Winton v. Brecon 
[(1858) 28 L.J. Ch. 598], Churchill v. 
Crease [(1828) 5 Bing. 177], United States 
v. Chase [(1889) 135 U.S. 255] and Carroll 
v. Greenwich Ins. Co. [(1905) 199 U.S. 
401]."

23.	In R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla v. UOI (1957 SCR 930) it 
was held as under: 
 "The question whether a statute which is 
void in part is to be treated as void in toto, 
or whether it is capable of enforcement as 
to that part which is valid is one which can 
arise only with reference to laws enacted 
by bodies which do not possess unlimited 
powers of legislation, as, for example, the 
legislatures in a Federal Union. The 
limitation on their powers may be of two 
kinds: It may be with reference to the 
subject-matter on which they could 
legislate, as, for example, the topics 
enumerated in the Lists in the Seventh 
Schedule in the Indian Constitution, ss. 91 
and 92 of the Canadian Constitution, and 
s. 51 of the Australian Constitution; or it 
may be with reference to the character of 
the legislation which they could enact in 
respect of subjects assigned to them, as for 
example, in relation to the fundamental 
rights guaranteed in Part III of the 
Constitution and similar constitutionally 
protected rights in the American and other 
Constitutions. When a legislature whose 
authority is subject to limitations aforesaid 
enacts a law which is wholly in excess of 
its powers, it is entirely void and must be 
completely ignored. But where the 
legislation falls in part within the area 
allotted to it and in part outside it, it is 
undoubtedly void as to the latter; but does 
it on that account become necessarily void 
in its entirety? The answer to this question 
must depend on whether what is valid 
could be separated from what is invalid, 
and that is a question which has to be 
decided by the court on a consideration of 
the provisions of the Act. This is a 
principle well established in American 
Jurisprudence, Vide Cooley's 
Constitutional Limitations, Vol. I, Chap. 
VII, Crawford on Statutory Construction, 
Chap. 16 and Sutherland on Statutory 
Construction, 3rd Edn, Vol. 2, Chap. 24. It 
has also been applied by the Privy Council 
in deciding on the validity of laws enacted 
by the legislatures of Australia and 
Canada, Vide Attorney-General for the 
Commonwealth of Australia v. Colonial 
Sugar Refining Company Limited [[1914] 
A.C. 237] and Attorney-General for Alberta 
v. Attorney-General for Canada [L.R. 
[1947] A.C. 503]. It was approved by the 
Federal Court in In re Hindu Women's 
Rights to Property Act [[1941] F.C.R. 12] 
and adopted by this Court in The State of 
Bombay and another v. F. N. Balsara 
[[1951] S.C.R. 682] and The State of 
Bombay v. The United Motors (India) Ltd., 
and others [[1953] S.C.R. 1069]. These 
decisions are relied on by Mr. Seervai as 
being decisive in his favour. Mr. 
Palkhiwala disputes this position, and 
maintains that on the decision of the Privy 
Council in Punjab Province v. Daulat 
Singh and others [[1946] F.C.R. 1] and of 
the decisions of this Court in Romesh 
Thappar v. State of Madras [[1950] S.C.R. 
594] and Chintaman Rao v. State of 
Madhya Pradesh [[1950] S.C.R. 759], the 
question must be answered in this favour. 
We must now examine the precise scope of 
these decisions.
The resulting position may thus be stated : 
When a statute is in part void, it will be 
enforced as regards the rest, if that is 
severable from what is invalid. It is 
immaterial for the purpose of this rule 
whether the invalidity of the statute arises 
by reason of its subject-matter being outside 
the competence of the legislature or by 
reason of its provisions contravening 
constitutional prohibitions. 
 That being the position in law, it is now 
necessary to consider whether the impugned 
provisions are severable in their application to 
competitions of a gambling character, 
assuming of course that the definition of 'prize 
competition' in s. 2(d) is wide enough to 
include also competitions involving skill to a 
substantial degree. It will be useful for the 
determination of this question to refer to 
certain rules of construction laid down by the 
American Courts, where the question of 
severability has been the subject of 
consideration in numerous authorities. They 
may be summarised as follows : 
1. In determining whether the valid parts of 
a statute are separable from the invalid 
parts thereof, it is the intention of the 
legislature that is the determining factor. 
The test to be applied is whether the 
legislature would have enacted the valid 
part if it had known that the rest of the 
statute was invalid. Vide Corpus Juris 
Secundum, Vol. 82, p. 156; Sutherland on 
Statutory Construction, Vol. 2, pp. 176-177. 
2. If the valid and invalid provisions are so 
inextricably mixed up that they cannot be 
separated from one another, then the 
invalidity of a portion must result in the 
invalidity of the Act in its entirety. On the 
other hand, if they are so distinct and 
separate that after striking out what is 
invalid, what remains is in itself a complete 
code independent of the rest, then it will be 
upheld notwithstanding that the rest has 
become unenforceable. Vide Cooley's 
Constitutional Limitations, Vol. 1 at pp. 
360-361; Crawford on Statutory 
Construction, pp. 217-218. 
3. Even when the provisions which are valid 
are distinct and separate from those which 
are invalid, if they all form part of a single 
scheme which is intended to be operative as 
a whole, then also the invalidity of a part 
will result in the failure of the whole. Vide 
Crawford on Statutory Construction, pp. 
218-219. 
4. Likewise, when the valid and invalid parts 
of a statute are independent and do not 
form part of a scheme but what is left after 
omitting the invalid portion is so thin and 
truncated as to be in substance different 
from what it was when it emerged out of the 
legislature, then also it will be rejected in its 
entirety. 
5. The separability of the valid and invalid 
provisions of a statute does not depend on 
whether the law is enacted in the same 
section or different sections; (Vide Cooley's 
Constitutional Limitations, Vol. 1, pp. 361-
362); it is not the form, but the substance of 
the matter that is material, and that has to 
be ascertained on an examination of the Act 
as a whole and of the setting of the relevant 
provisions therein. 
6. If after the invalid portion is expunged 
from the statute what remains cannot be 
enforced without making alterations and 
modifications therein, then the whole of it 
must be struck down as void, as otherwise 
it will amount to judicial legislation. Vide 
Sutherland on Statutory Construction, Vol. 
2, p. 194. 
7. In determining the legislative intent on 
the question of separability, it will be 
legitimate to take into account the history of 
the legislation, its object, the title and the 
preamble to it. Vide Sutherland on 
Statutory Construction, Vol. 2, pp. 177-
178." 

24.	In  AIIMS Students Union v. AIIMS (2002 (1) SCC 428) in 
para 35 it was observed as follows:
"35. The principle of institutional continuity 
while seeking admission to higher levels of 
study as propounded by the learned counsel 
for the appellants though argued at length 
does not have much room available for 
innovative judicial zeal to play, for the ground 
already stands almost occupied by a set of 
precedents, more so when we are dealing with 
professional or technical courses of study. It 
would suffice to have a brief resume thereof 
noticing the details wherever necessary".

	It was again highlighted in para 44 as follows:

"44.	 When protective discrimination for 
promotion of equalisation is pleaded, the 
burden is one the party who seeks to justify 
the ex facie deviation from equality. The basic 
rule is equality of opportunity for every person 
in the country, which is a constitutional 
guarantee. A candidate who gets more marks 
than another is entitled to preference for 
admission. Merit must be the test when 
choosing the best, according to this rule of 
equal chance for equal marks. This proposition 
has greater importance when we reach the 
higher levels and education like post-graduate 
courses. Reservation, as an exception, may be 
justified subject to discharging the burden of 
proving justification in favour of the class 
which must be educationally handicapped-the 
reservation geared up to getting over the 
handicap. The rationale of reservation in the 
case of medical students must be removal of 
regional or class inadequacy or like 
disadvantage. Even there the quantum of 
reservation should not be excessive or 
societally injurious. The higher the level of the 
speciality the lesser the role of reservation."

25.	A bare reading of the provision goes to show that the 
burden is on the person who justifies deviation from equality.

26.	Even then, this doctrine was upheld by the Supreme 
Court of U.S.A. in Plessy v. Ferguson  (163 U.S. 537(1896). 
This case involved a challenge to a Louisiana statute that 
provided for equal but separate accommodations for black and 
white passengers in trains. The Court rejected the challenge. 
Justice Brown famously observed:
	If one race be inferior to the other 
socially, the constitution of the United States 
cannot put them upon the same plane. (163 
U.S. at 552)


27.	He held that racial segregation was a reasonable exercise 
of State police power for the promotion of the public good and 
upheld the law.

28.	Thus, even in this second phase, affirmative action was 
never truly initiated  the country was still struggling to 
establish even a formally equal society.

29.	At the same time, another very important development in 
its constitutional law was taking place, which would later have 
a serious impact on affirmative action programmes. This was 
the birth of the doctrine of strict scrutiny. 

30.	'Strict scrutiny' is one of the three standards for judicial 
review of legislative and administrative action developed in the 
United States, the other being "rational basis" and 
"intermediate scrutiny".

31.	The origin of this standard can be traced to the decision 
in United States v Carolene Products (304 U.S. 144 (1938). 
The question before the Court was whether the Filled Milk Act, 
1923 which prohibited the shipment in interstate commerce of 
skimmed milk compounded with any fat or oil other than milk 
fat, so as to resemble milk or cream, transcended the power of 
Congress to regulate inter state commerce or infringed the 
Fifth Amendment. Justice Harlan Stone, writing the opinion 
for the Court, upheld the law, holding that the existence of 
facts supporting the legislative judgment was to be presumed, 
for regulatory legislation affecting ordinary commercial 
transactions was not to be pronounced unconstitutional 
unless in the light of the facts made known or generally 
assumed it was of such a character as to preclude the 
assumption that it rested upon some rational basis within the 
knowledge and experience of the legislators. However, he 
added what has been described as "the most celebrated 
footnote in constitutional law". 
"There may be narrower scope for operation of 
the presumption of constitutionality when 
legislation appears on its face to be within a 
specific prohibition of the Constitution, such 
as those of the first ten Amendments, which 
are deemed equally specific when held to be 
embraced within the Fourteenth." 

32.	What the Court was saying was that economic legislation 
would be judged by a standard of "rational basis"  so long as 
the law was a rational way of furthering a legitimate 
governmental purpose, it was valid. However, where the 
legislation "on its face" appeared to be violating any of the 
fundamental rights, a more exacting standard would be 
applied. 

33.	The precise term "strict scrutiny" was used by the Court 
for the first time in Skinner v. Oklahoma (316 U.S. 535 (1942). 
The Oklahoma Habitual Criminal Sterilisation Act provided for 
vasectomy to be performed on any person convicted two or 
more times for crimes amounting to "felonies involving moral 
turpitude". Justice Douglas, giving the opinion of the Court, 
described the statute as violating the right to have offspring  
"a right which is basic to the perpetuation of a race". The 
question before the Court was whether this statute violated 
the 14th Amendment. Holding that it did, Justice Douglas 
observed:
"Strict scrutiny of the classification which a 
State makes in a sterilization law is essential, 
lest unwittingly or otherwise invidious 
discriminations are made against groups or 
types of individuals in violation of the 
constitutional guarantee of just and equal 
laws." 

34.	In India  there has to be collective commitment for 
upliftment of those who needed it. In that sense, the question 
again comes back to the basic issue as to whether  the action 
taken by the Government can be upheld after making judicial 
scrutiny. Much assistance is not available to the petitioners 
from the American decisions. 

35.	It is to be noted that the doctrine of separation as is 
prevalent in the American Society is not of much consequence  
in the  Indian scenario. It needs to be clarified that the 
expression 'strict scrutiny' has also been used by the Indian 
Courts in Narendra Kumar and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors. 
(1960 (2) SCR 375) but it appears to have been used in 
different context. What really appears to be the intention for 
the use of the expression is "careful and deeper scrutiny" and 
not in the sense of strict scrutiny of the provisions as is 
prevalent in the American jurisprudence.  It is used in 
different sense. The application appears to be in technical 
sense in the American Courts, for example, Regents of 
University of California  v. Allan Bakke (438 U.S. 265). 

36.	Some of the judgments of American Courts throwing light 
on the controversy need to be noted:
37.	In Allan Bakke's case (supra) it was held as follows: 
	"Hence, the purpose of helping certain 
groups whom the faculty of the Davis 
Medical School perceived as victims of 
"societal discrimination" does not justify a 
classification that imposes disadvantages 
upon persons like respondent, who bear 
no responsibility for whatever harm the 
beneficiaries of the special admissions".    

"The fatal flaw in petitioner's preferential 
program is its disregard of individual rights as 
guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment.  
Shelley v. Kraemer, 334 US, at 22, 92 L Ed 
1161, 68 S Ct 836, 3 ALRd 441.  Such rights 
are not absolute.  But when a State's 
distribution of benefits or imposition of 
burdens hinges on ancestry or the color of a 
person's skin or ancestry, that individual is 
entitled to a demonstration that the challenged 
classification is necessary to promote a 
substantial state interest. Petitioner has failed 
to carry this burden."  

38.	In Grutter v. Bollinger  (539 U.S. 306) it was held as 
follows:

[21, 22a]	"We acknowledge that "there are 
serious problems of justice connected with the 
idea of preference itself."  Bakke, 438 US, at 
298, 57 L Ed 2d 750, 98 S Ct 2733 (opinion of 
Powell, J).  Narrow tailoring, therefore, requires 
that a race-conscious admissions program not 
unduly harm members of any racial group.  
Even remedial race-based governmental action 
generally "remains subject to continuing 
oversight to assure that it will work the least 
harm possible to other innocent persons 
competing for the benefit."  Id., at 308, 57 L Ed 
2d 750, 98 S Ct 2733.  To be narrowly tailored, 
a race-conscious admissions program must 
not "unduly burden individuals who are not 
members of the favored racial and ethnic 
groups."  Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, 497 
Us 547, 630, 111 L Ed 2d 445, 110 S Ct 2997 
(1990) (O' Connor, J., dissenting). 
 [22b, 23] We are satisfied that the Law 
School's admissions program does not.  
Because the Law School considers "all 
pertinent elements of diversity," it can (and 
does) select non-minority applicants who have 
greater potential to enhance student body 
diversity over underrepresented minority 
applicants.  See Bakke, supra, at 317, 57 L Ed 
2d 750, 98 S Ct 2733 (opinion of Powell, J).  As 
Justice Powell recognized in Bakke, so long as 
a race-conscious admissions program uses 
race as a "plus" factor in the context of 
individualized consideration, a rejected 
applicant 	"will not have been foreclosed from 
all consideration for that seat simply because 
he was not the right color or had the wrong 
surname  His qualifications would have 
been weighed fairly and competitively, and he 
would have no basis to complain of unequal 
treatment under the Fourteenth Amendment."  
438 US, at 318, 57 L Ed 2d 750, 98 S Ct 2733.
[13f, 22C] We agree that, in the context of its 
individualized inquiry into the possible 
diversity contributions of all applicants, the 
Law School's race-conscious admissions 
program does not unduly harm nonminority 
applicants.

[24, 25a, 26] We are mindful, however, that 
"[a] core purpose of the Fourteenth 
Amendment was to do away with all 
governmentally imposed discrimination based 
on race" Palmore v Sidoti, [539 US 342] 466 
US 429, 432, 80 L Ed 2d, 421, 104 s Ct 1879 
(1984). Accordingly, race-conscious 
admissions policies must be limited in time.  
This requirement reflects that racial 
classifications, however, compelling their goals 
are potentially so dangerous that they may be 
employed no more broadly than the interest 
demands. Enshrining a permanent 
justification for racial preferences would offend 
this fundamental equal protection principle.  
We see no reason to exempt race-conscious 
admissions programs from the requirement 
that all governmental use of race must have a 
logical end point.  The Law School, too, 
concedes that all "race-conscious programs 
must have reasonable durational limits."  Brief 
for Respondent Bollinger et al. 32. [25b] In the 
context of higher education, the durational 
requirement can be met by sunset provisions 
in race-conscious admissions policies and 
periodic reviews to determine whether racial 
preferences are still necessary to achieve 
student body diversity.  Universities in 
California, Florida, and Washington State, 
where racial preferences in admissions are 
prohibited by state law, are currently engaged 
in experimenting with a wide variety of 
alternative approaches. Universities in other 
States can and should draw on the most 
promising aspects of these race-neutral 
alternatives as they develop.  Cf. United States 
v. Lopez, 514 US 549, 581, 131 L Ed 2d 626, 
115 S Ct 1624 (1995) (Kennedy, J., 
concurring) ("[T] he States may perform their 
role as laboratories for experimentation to 
devise various solutions where the best 
solution is far from clear").  The requirement 
that all race-conscious admissions programs 
have a termination point "assure[s] all citizens 
that the deviation from the norm of equal 
treatment of all racial and ethnic groups is a 
temporary matter, a measure taken in the 
service of the goal of equality itself."  Richmond 
v. J.A. Croson Co., 488 US, at 510, 102 L Ed 
2d 854, 109 S Ct 706 (plurality opinion); see 
also Nathanson &amp; Bartnik. The 
Constitutionality of Preferential Treatment for 
Minority Applicants to Professional Schools, 
[539 US 343] 58 Chicago Bar Rec. 282, 293 
(May-June 1977) ("It would be a sad day 
indeed, were America to become a quota-
ridden society, with each identifiable minority 
assigned proportional representation in every 
desirable walk of life. But that is not the 
rationale for programs of preferential 
treatment; the acid test of their justification 
will be their efficacy in eliminating the need for 
any racial or ethnic preferences at all."                     

39.	The provisions of the American Constitution in United 
States relating to formal equality concept do not appear to 
have operated from the beginning of the American 
Constitution. 

40.	Although even under the 1919 and 1935 Government of 
India Acts the rights of certain class of people like Scheduled 
Castes, Scheduled Tribes and the deprived classes have been 
recognized, in America, the rights have been conferred on 
individuals and so much on the groups. The freedoms 
contemplated by the Indian Constitution originally related to 
seven categories which presently stand at six after the 
property rights were deleted. The stand of Mr. Vahanvati and 
Mr. Gopal Subramanium is that the logic of strict scrutiny, 
compelling the Government  and narrow tailoring do not have 
relevance so far as the present case is concerned. 

41.	In Thomas's case (supra) it was clearly noticed by this 
Court that American conditions do not apply adequately for 
the Indian scenario. Unlike U.S.A., the targeted beneficiaries 
are alien to our Constitution. In India cognizance has been 
taken constitutionally. The victims of untouchability, 
identifying social and economic backwardness have been 
accepted as permissible measures. However, the question how 
long they can be continued is another aspect which shall be 
dealt with separately. Rationality in that sense is a measure 
for the special provisions. But the question that still needs to 
be addressed is whether these groups are really identifiable. 
While formulating the policy all factors need not be specifically  
expressed but there must be some criteria to identify social 
and educational backwardness. 

42.	In A.K. Roy v. Union of India (1982 (1) SCC 271) it was 
noted as follows:

"8. We are not, as we cannot be, unmindful of 
the danger to people's liberties which comes in 
any community from what is called the 
tyranny of the majority. Uncontrolled power in 
the executive is a great enemy of freedom and 
therefore, eternal vigilance is necessary in the 
realm of liberty. But we cannot transplant, in 
the Indian context and conditions, principles 
which took birth in other soils, without a 
careful examination of their relevance to the 
interpretation of our Constitution. No two 
Constitutions are alike, for it is not mere words 
that make a Constitution. It is the history of a 
people which lends colour and meaning to its 
Constitution. We must therefore turn 
inevitably to the historical origin of the 
ordinance making power conferred by our 
Constitution and consider the scope of that 
power in the light of the restraints by which 
that power is hedged. Neither in England nor 
in the United States of America does the 
executive enjoy anything like the power to 
issue ordinances. In India, that power has a 
historical origin and the executive, at all times, 
has resorted to it freely as and when it 
considered it necessary to do so. One of the 
larger States in India has manifested its 
addiction to that power by making an 
overgenerous use of it  so generous indeed, 
that ordinances which lapsed by efflux of time 
were renewed successively by a chain of 
kindred creatures, one after another. And, the 
ordinances embrace everything under the sun, 
from Prince to pauper and crimes to contracts. 
The Union Government too, so we are informed 
passed about 200 Ordinances between 1960 
and 1980, out of which 19 were passed in 
1980". 

43.	One of the grey areas focused by learned counsel for the 
petitioners and the respondents is the ever perplexing 
question "how long". The respondents say that so long as the 
problems of backwardness exist they can be continued. The 
petitioners have highlighted that notwithstanding the concerns 
shown in Indra Sawhney No.1 and in a large number of cases 
that the reservations are not meant to be a   permanent 
feature there is a case for concern. Admittedly,   there is no 
deletion from the list of other backward classes. It goes on 
increasing. Learned counsel for the respondents have stated 
that in large number of cases where applications were made 
for inclusion they have been turned down. But that is no 
answer to the question as to why and how there has been no 
exclusion.  Is it that backwardness has increased instead of 
decreasing. If the answer is 'yes', as contended by the 
respondents, then one is bound to  raise eyebrows as to the 
effectiveness of providing reservations or quotas. 

44. The ultimate object is to bring those who are 
disadvantaged to a level where they no longer continue to be 
dis-advantaged. It needs no emphasis that individual rights 
are superior to the social rights. All fundamental rights are to 
be read together. The inequalities are to be removed. Yet the 
fact that there has been no exclusion raises a doubt about the 
real concern  to remove inequality.

45.	 The ultimate objective is to bring people to a particular 
level so that there can be equality of opportunity. In that 
context, one has to keep in view the justice and redress 
principles. There should not be mere equality in law but 
equality in fact. 

46.	The necessary ingredients of equality essentially involve 
equalization of unequals. Linked with this question the 
problem posed by the petitioners is whether reservation is the 
only way to equalize unequals? There are several methods and 
modes. If reservation really does not work as contended by the 
petitioners, then the alternative methods can be adopted. It is 
the stand of the respondents that not only reservations but 
other incentives like free lodging and boarding facilities have 
been   provided in some States. 

47.	 Learned counsel for the respondents have stated  that 
the measures under challenge are nothing but a much needed  
leap towards attainment of the objectives.  If it is true, the leap 
has to end somewhere. It cannot hang in the air as there is 
nothing immortal in this world; much less, a progressive 
measure purportedly intended to benefit the other backward 
classes. If after nearly six decades the objectives have not been 
achieved, necessarily the need for its continuance warrants 
deliberations. It is to be noted that some of the provisions were 
intended to be replaced  after  a decade but have continued. It 
indirectly shows that backwardness appears to have 
purportedly increased and not diminished. It would therefore 
be rational and logical to restrict operation of the impugned 
Statute for a period of 10 years from its inception.

48.	At this juncture, report of the Oversight Committee 
throws considerable light on the controversy. Some parts of 
the Report need to be noted. 
	This report seeks to expand the provision of 
Higher Education while at the same time ensuring 
social inclusion and academic excellence. A society 
which excludes a significant section of its 
population from access to higher education cannot 
be said to be providing equality of opportunity. 
Equally, if academic excellence gets compromised in 
the process of expansion, it would lose its 
competitive edge in the emerging knowledge society 
 an edge which can propel India into a position of 
global leadership. 
Page X and XI of the report
	A simpler way of implementing reservations 
was to steamroll our way through, in the name of 
social equity, regardless of its impact on quality and 
excellence. We have deliberately chosen the more 
difficult way which delivers equity in a manner that 
enhances excellence i.e. by making concomitant 
investments in faculty &amp; infrastructure and by 
bringing much needed governance related reforms 
involving institutional, financial and administrative 
autonomy and process re-engineering in our Higher 
Educational Governance system. It is easy to 
equalize by "mindlessly leveling everyone down to 
lowest common-denominator". Our effort has been 
to create an upward moving equalization process- 
where the disabilities are overcome by the erstwhile 
excluded sections and the system brings out the 
best in them.    

	Besides the many out of the box innovative 
ideas concerning faculty and infrastructure related 
issues, I believe three of our recommendations, 
which cut horizontally across the five groups, are 
critical to the establishment of the goal of an 
"inclusive society, in pursuit of excellence". These 
four programmes are considered by the Oversight 
Committee to be integral to the above vision and 
should be considered to be inseverable part of our 
core recommendations.  (page-x)

	We have to acknowledge that the challenges 
facing us in the entire education sector are 
enormous and in the Tertiary Education Sector 
these can be met, only if both public and private 
funding to educational institutions increased 
several fold. The need for private participation in 
this mammoth task cannot be over-emphasized but 
market forces themselves cannot  deliver justice. 
The relative importance of public vs. private funding 
is brought out very strongly by Joseph Stiglitz  
when he opined "I had studied the failures of both 
markets and governments, and was not so naove to 
think that the government could remedy every 
failure. Neither was I so foolish as to believe that 
markets by themselves solved every societal 
problem. Inequality, unemployment, pollution: 
these are all important issues in which Government 
has to take an importance role." 

	"Expansion, Inclusion and Excellence" has 
been our credo. They have remained the abiding 
theme guiding all our deliberations.  I will be failing 
in my duty if the Oversight Committee does not 
acknowledge the source of inspiration for our 
deliberations. It is the Prime Minister's speech 
giving the overpowering vision of the "need to create 
the second wave of nation building" which has 
inspired us in our thoughts and deliberations. I 
would also like to express my gratitude to Hon'ble 
HRD Minister, Sri Arjun Singhji for his affection and 
guidance right through. (Page-xi)

Treatment of the creamy Layer (Chapter IV- 
Report of Oversight Committee Vol.-I)

	4.2 (b)	The true benefit of reservations will 
be realized only when the high school enrolment of 
OBCs, especially in rural areas, increases  
significantly. Attention will need to be paid to this 
issue in the coming years.

Chapter VI- Estimate of Resources required for 
the expansion

6.1	In overall terms, the total estimated 
expenditure on the expansion has now been 
assessed by the five Sub-Groups in their final 
reports at Rs.18,197.83 crore, as compared to the 
amount of Rs.16,563.34 crore, that was included by 
the Oversight Committee in its interim report. The 
summary statement of additional student strength, 
faculty required and estimates of recurring and 
non-recurring expenditure that have been projected 
by the Groups are as at Table 6.1 and the year-wise 
break up is at table 6.2.
6.3	The Committee in its discussions with the 
individual Groups, had stressed the need to 
estimate the additional infrastructure and 
manpower that would be required after taking into 
account the slack, if any, in the existing facilities as 
also the scope for using IT as a resource multiplier. 
While the Groups seems to have accepted this in 
principle, their expenditure projections, and the 

norms  on which they are based seems to  have just 
extrapolated past trends. The Committee has had 
some input regarding global trends and the best 
practices being followed in the world's leading 
institutions. Based on this, and in consultation  
with experts, the Committee has developed a plan 
for a "Gyan Vahini" project, as has been explained 
in an earlier Chapter in this report. The total 
expenditure on  this component of the expansion 
and upgradation project would be Rs.1752 crore in 
5 years. Apart from significantly enhancing the 
quality of instruction and learning, and brining it 
close to the best levels in the world, this investment 
will certainly contribute to efficiency and to 
reducing the conventional costs of the higher 
education system.
Summary Statement of Expenditure Requirements
(As given in the Final Reports of the Groups)

Sector
No. of 
Instns.
Existing 
Student 
Intake
Annual 
Addl. 
Student 
Intake
Addl. 
Facility 
Required
Non 
Recurring 
Ex.
Recur
ring 
Exp. 
(5Yrs)
Total 
Exp. 
In 5 
Yrs.

Agricu
lture
5
825
454
187
102.75
92.71
195.46








Central 
Univers
ities
17
92011
49689
6609
2702.11
2455.
92
5158.
03
Manag
ement
7
1791
966
139
511.32
177.     
48
688.    
80








Medic
al
11
993
565
N.A.
1783.98
1027.
69
2811.
67
Engin
eering
38
29671
16440
4919
5503.83
3840.
04
9343.
87
Grand
Total

125291
68114
11854
10603.99
7593.
84
18197.
83
Chapter VII- The Way Forward

7.1	As indicated earlier in this report, this 
opportunity for expansion, inclusion and excellence 
should only be the beginning of a larger process, 
which is to build a knowledge society in India and 
allow the country to take its rightful place in the 
comity of nations. Our recent economic growth and 
the values of knowledge and education carried 
forward by a billion diverse people, point to India's 
potential future as a knowledge society. Other 
countries that visualize a similar future have 
planned massive investments in order to enhance 
both the quality and quantity of higher education 
and research. China, for example, has made 
substantial increase in its allocation of resources of 
higher education. In the first phase, China has 
provided a grant of US $ 125 million to each of the 
10 leading universities and US $ 225 million to 
Beijing and Tsinghua Universities. In the second 
phase, China proposes to provide additional grants 
to 30 universities, with the objective of having 100 
high quality universities in China in the 21st 
century and with 15% of the citizens in the age 
group 18-22 receiving tertiary education.

7.2	India has suffered in the past because of 
severe under investment in higher education. This 
has been caused partly by the thinking that looks at 
primary and higher education in an either or 
manner. It is very clear however that large public 
investment is needed in both sectors. As Prime 
Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh said, while launching 
the Knowledge Commission, "At the bottom of the 
knowledge pyramid, the challenge is one of 
improving access to primary education. At the top of 
the pyramid there is need to make our institutions 
of higher education and research world class. The 
time has come for India to embark on a second 
wave of nation building. Denied this investment, the 
youth will become a social and economic liability.

49.	It was emphasized by learned counsel for the petitioners 
that the massive financial burden question finds no place in 
the parliamentary debate. In response, Mr. Vahanvati has 
submitted that before the Parliamentary Standing Committee, 
the report of the Oversight Committee was available. When the 
Oversight Committee's report was discussed in detail, needless 
to say the financial aspect was also considered.  

50.	It has been highlighted by Mr. P.P. Rao that unmindful of 
the duty to focus on primary and elementary education, large 
sums of money are intended to be used for implementation of 
Statute. Various figures and datas have been highlighted to 
show that there is really no concern for the primary and 
elementary education. Repelling these contentions Mr. 
Vahanvati has highlighted that there is no laxity so far as 
primary and elementary education is concerned. He has 
referred to voluminous details relating to Sarva Shiksha 
Abhiyan. It is contended that uniform policy of elementary 
education and the progress made upto 31.3.2007  shows the 
concern of the Government to translate into reality the 
constitutional objective of providing adequate education to all 
citizens. It is true that there has been considerable effort in 
this regard. But one question still remains to be answered. 
There has to be balancing of priorities. Mr. Vahanvati has said 
that this balancing is prerogative of the Government. It is true 
that Government has a large area of discretion in choosing its 
priorities. But one factor cannot be lost sight of. The 
fundamental stress has to be on elementary education. If that 
is done, as a consequence there would be reduction in the 
need for spending more money on higher education.  Stress on 
primary and elementary education  would be a leap forward 
towards higher education. There has been considerable 
number of drop outs in the higher classes. This is a reality in 
spite of all steps which the Government  claims to have 
adopted to ensure that every child of a particular age group 
has education as warranted by the Constitution as a 
fundamental right.

51.	Unni Krishnan, J.P. and Ors. v. State of A.P. and Ors. 
(1993 (1) SCC 645) emphasized on the importance of 
education in the following words:

"166. In Bandhua Mukti Morcha this Court 
held that the right to life guaranteed by Article 
21 does take in "educational facilities". (The 
relevant portion has been quoted herein 
before). Having regard to the fundamental 
significance of education to the life of, an 
individual and the nation, and adopting the 
reasoning and logic adopted in the earlier 
decisions of this Court referred to herein 
before, we hold, agreeing with the statement in 
Bandhua Mukti Morcha, that right to 
education is implicit in and flows from the 
right to life guaranteed by Article 21. That the 
right to education has been treated as one of 
transcendental importance in the life of an 
individual has been recognised not only in this 
country since thousands of years, but all over 
the world. In Mohini Jain, the impatience of 
education has been duly and rightly stressed. 
The relevant observations have already been 
set out in para 7 herein before. In particular, 
we agree with the observation that without 
education being provided to the citizens of this 
country, the objectives set forth in the 
Preamble to the Constitution cannot be 
achieved. The Constitution would fail. We do 
not think that the importance of education 
could have been better emphasised than in the 
above words. The importance of education was 
emphasised in the "Neethishatakam' by 
Bhartruhari (First Century B.C. in the 
following words:
Translation: 
Education is the special manifestation of 
man; Education is the treasure which 
can be preserved without the fear of loss; 
Education secures material pleasure, 
happiness and fame; 
Education is the teacher of the teacher; 
Education is God incarnate; 
Education secures honour at the hands 
of the State, not money. 
A man without education is equal to 
animal.
168.	In Brown v. Board of Education (347 US 
483 (1954) Earl Warren, C.J., speaking for the 
U.S. Supreme Court emphasized the right to 
education in the following words:

"Today, education is perhaps the 
most important function of State 
and local governmentsIt is 
required in the performance of our 
most basic responsibilities, even 
service in the armed forces. It is the 
very foundation of good citizenship.  
Today it is the principal instrument 
in awakening the child to cultural 
values, in preparing him for later 
professional training, and in helping 
him to adjust normally to his 
environment. In these days, it is 
doubtful any child may reasonably 
be expected to succeed in life if he is 
denied the opportunity of an 
education."

52.	Observations of this Court in AIIMS Students' Union case 
(supra)  highlight the importance of higher education and the 
modalities to be adopted for ensuring excellence are in the 
following words:
"58. The Preamble to the Constitution of India 
secures, as one of its objects, fraternity 
assuring the dignity of the individual and the 
unity and integrity of the nation to 'we he 
people of India'. Reservation unless protected 
by the constitution itself, as given to us by the 
founding fathers and as adopted by the people 
of India, is sub-version of fraternity, unity and 
integrity and dignity of the individual. While 
dealing with Directive Principles of State 
Policy, Article 46 is taken note of often by 
overlooking Articles 41 and 47. Article 41 
obliges the State inter alia to make effective 
provision for securing the right to work and 
right to education. Any reservation in favour of 
one, to the extent of reservation, is an inroad 
on the right of others to work and to learn. 
Article 47 recognises the improvement of 
public health as one of the primary duties of 
the State. Public health can be improved by 
having the best of doctors, specialists and 
super specialists. Under-graduate level is a 
primary or basic level of education in medical 
sciences wherein reservation can be 
understood as the fulfilment of societal 
obligation of the State towards the weaker 
segments of the society. Beyond this, a 
reservation is a reversion or diversion from the 
performance of primary duty of the State. 
Permissible reservation at the lowest or 
primary rung is a step in the direction of 
assimilating the lesser fortunates in 
mainstream of society by bringing them to the 
level of others which they cannot achieve 
unless protectively pushed. Once that is done 
the protection needs to be withdrawn in the 
own interest of protectees so that they develop 
strength and feel confident of stepping on 
higher rungs on their own legs shedding the 
crutches. Pushing the protection of reservation 
beyond the primary level betrays bigwigs' 
desire to keep the crippled crippled for ever. 
Rabindra Nath Tagore's vision of a free India 
cannot be complete unless "knowledge is free" 
and "tireless striving stretches its arms 
towards perfection". Almost a quarter century 
after the people of India have given the 
Constitution unto themselves, a chapter on 
fundamental duties came to be incorporated in 
the Constitution. Fundamental duties, as 
defined in Article 51A, are not made 
enforceable by a writ of court just as the 
fundamental rights are, but it cannot be lost 
sight of that 'duties' in Part IVA - Article 51A 
are prefixed by the same word 'fundamental' 
which was prefixed by the founding fathers of 
the Constitution to 'rights' in Part III. Every 
citizen of India is fundamentally obliged to 
develop the scientific temper and humanism. 
He is fundamentally duty bound to strive 
towards excellence in all spheres of individual 
and collective activity so that the nation 
constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour 
and achievements. State is, all the citizens 
placed together and hence though Article 51A 
does not expressly cast any fundamental duty 
on the State, the fact remains that the duty of 
every citizen of India is the collective duty of 
the Sate. Any reservation, apart from being 
sustainable on the constitutional anvil, must 
also be reasonable to be permissible. In 
assessing the reasonability one of the factors 
to be taken into consideration would be -- 
whether the character and quantum of 
reservation would stall or accelerate achieving 
the ultimate goal of excellence enabling the 
nation constantly rising to higher levels. In the 
era of globalisation, where the nation as a 
whole has to compete with other nations of the 
world so as to survive, excellence cannot be 
given an unreasonable go by and certainly not 
compromised in its entirety. Fundamental 
duties, though not enforceable by a writ of the 
court, yet provide a valuable guide and aid to 
interpretation of constitutional and legal 
issues. In case of doubt or choice, people's 
wish as manifested through Article 51A, can 
serve as a guide not only for resolving the 
issue but also for constructing or moulding the 
relief to be given by the courts. Constitutional 
enactment of fundamental duties, if it has to 
have any meaning, must be used by courts as 
a tool to tab, even a taboo, on State action 
drifting away from constitutional values".

53.	Respondents have vehemently contended that the 
concept of creamy layer may have relevance for the purpose of 
Article 16(4), but is really inconsequential so far as Articles 
15(4) and 15(5) are concerned. It is submitted that Article 
16(4) is relatable to inadequate representation in Government 
services and in that context the well to do  in the socially and 
educationally backward classes have to be excluded in view of 
the decisions of this Court. But that logic cannot apply to the 
present dispute which relates to admissions to educational 
institutions. Before considering the question as to the 
desirability of excluding 'creamy layer' the concept of creamy 
layer needs to be focused upon. Observations of this Court in 
various cases on this concept need to be noted. 

54.	In N.M. Thomas's case (supra) at page 363, it was inter 
alia observed as follows : 
"124. A word of sociological caution. In the 
light of experience, here and elsewhere, the 
danger of "reservation", it seems to me, is 
threefold. Its benefits, by and large, are 
snatched away by the top creamy layer of the 
"backward" caste or class, thus keeping the 
weakest among the weak always weak and 
leaving the fortunate layers to consume the 
whole cake. Secondly, this claim is overplayed 
extravagantly in democracy by large and vocal 
groups whose burden of backwardness has 
been substantially lightened by the march of 
time and measures of better education and 
more opportunities of employment, but wish to 
wear the "weaker section" label as a means to 
score over their near-equals formally 
categorised as the upper brackets. Lastly, a 
lasting solution to the problem comes only 
from improvement of social environment, 
added educational facilities and cross-
fertilisation of castes by inter-caste and inter-
class marriages sponsored as a massive State 
programme, and this solution is calculatedly 
hidden from view by the higher "backward" 
groups with a vested interest in the plums of 
backwardism. But social science research, not 
judicial impressionism, will alone tell the 
whole truth and a constant process of objective 
re-evaluation of progress registered by the 
"underdog" categories is essential lest a once 
deserving "reservation" should be degraded 
into "reverse discrimination". Innovations in 
administrative strategy to help the really 
untouched, most backward classes also 
emerge from such socio-legal studies and audit 
exercises, if dispassionately made. In fact, 
research conducted by the A.N. Sinha Institute 
of Social Studies, Patna, has revealed a dual 
society among harijans, a tiny elite gobbling up 
the benefits and the darker layers sleeping 
distances away from the special concessions. 
For them, Articles 46 and 335 remain a "noble 
romance", the bonanza going to the "higher" 
harijans. I mention this in the present case 
because lower division clerks are likely to be 
drawn from the lowest levels of harijan 
humanity and promotion prospects being 
accelerated by withdrawing, for a time, "test" 
qualifications for this category may perhaps 
delve deeper. An equalitarian breakthrough in 
a hierarchical structure has to use many 
weapons and Rule 13/AA perhaps is one. 
Xx			xx			xx 
 
 139. It is platitudinous constitutional law 
that Articles 14 to 16 are a common code of 
guaranteed equality, the first laying down the 
broad doctrine, the other two applying it to 
sensitive areas historically important and 
politically polemical in a climate of 
communalism and jobbery. 

55.	In  Vasant Kumar's  case (supra) at page 732 the view 
was re-iterated in the following words : 
"24. In order to appreciate the view point advanced 
by Mr Desai which appeals to me both for its 
indepth study of the problem, and a fresh outlook 
on this vexed problem, at the outset let me take a 
look at the futuristic view of the Indian Society as 
envisaged in the Constitution. No one is left in any 
doubt that the future Indian Society was to be 
casteless and classless. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru 
the first Prime Minister of India said that Mahatma 
Gandhi has shaken the foundations of caste and 
the masses have been powerfully affected. But an 
even greater power than Gandhi is at work, the 
conditions of modern life  and it seems at last this 
hoary and tenacious ralic of past times must die. 
Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the Nation said, 
"The caste system as we know is an anachronism. It 
must go if both Hinduism and India are to live and 
grow from day to day". In its onward march towards 
realising the constitutional goal, every attempt has 
to be made to destroy caste stratification. Article 
38(2) enjoins the State to strive to minimise the 
inequality in income and endeavour to eliminate 
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, 
not only amongst individuals but also amongst 
groups of people residing in different areas or 
engaged in different vocations. Article 46 enjoins 
duty to promote with special care the educational 
and economic interests of the weaker sections of the 
people, and in particular   of the Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from 
social injustice and all forms of exploitation. 
Continued retention of the division of the society 
into various castes simultaneously introduces 
inequality of status. And this inequality in status is 
largely responsible for retaining inequality in 
facilities and  opportunities, ultimately resulting in 
bringing into existence an economically depressed 
class for transcending caste structure and caste 
barrier. The society therefore was to be classless 
casteless society. In order to set up such a society, 
steps have to be taken to weaken and progressively 
eliminate caste structure. Unfortunately, the 
movement is in the reverse gear. Caste stratification 
has become more rigid to some extent, and where 
concessions and preferred treatment schemes are 
introduced for economically disadvantaged classes, 
identifiable by caste label, the caste structure 
unfortunately received a fresh lease of life. In fact 
there is a mad rush for being recognized as 
belonging to a caste which by its nomenclature 
would be included in the list of socially and 
educationally backward classes. To illustrate: 
Bakshi Commission in Gujarat recognized as many 
as 82 castes as being socially and educationally 
backward. On the publication of its report, 
Government of Gujarat received representations by 
members of those castes who had not made any 
representation to the Bakshi Commission for 
treating them as socially and educationally 
backward. This phenomenon was noticed by 
Mandal Commission when it observed: "Whereas 
the Commission has tried to make the State-wise 
lists of OBCs as comprehensive as possible, it is 
quite likely that several synonymy of the castes 
listed as backward have been left out. Certain 
castes are known by a number of synonymy which 
vary from one region to the other and their complete 
coverage is almost impossible". Mandal Commission 
found a way out by recommending that if a 
particular caste has been listed as backward then 
all its synonyms whether mentioned in the State 
lists or not should also be treated as backward. 
Gujarat Government was forced to appoint a second 
commission known as Rane Commission.  Rane 
Commission took note of the fact that there was an 
organised effort for being considered socially and 
educationally backward castes. Rane Commission 
recalled the observations in Balaji case  that "Social 
backwardness is on the ultimate analysis the result 
of poverty to a very large extent". The Commission 
noticed that some of the castes just for the sake of 
being considered as socially and educationally 
backward, have degraded themselves to such an 
extent that, they had no hesitation in attributing 
different types of vices to and associating other 
factors indicative of backwardness, with their 
castes. The Commission noted that the malaise 
requires to be remedied. The Commission therefore, 
devised a method for determining socially and 
educationally backward classes without reference to 
caste, beneficial to all sections of people irrespective 
of the caste to which they belong. The Commission 
came to an irrefutable conclusion that amongst 
certain castes and communities or class of people, 
only lower income groups amongst them are socially 
and educationally backward. We may recall here a 
trite observation in case of N.M. Thomas  which 
reads as under (SCC pg.363 para 124): 
 "A word of sociological caution. In the 
light of experience, here and elsewhere, 
the danger of 'reservation', it seems to 
me, is threefold. Its benefits, by and 
large, are snatched away by the top 
creamy layer of the 'backward' caste or 
class, thus keeping the weakest among 
the weak always weak and leaving the 
fortunate layers to consume the whole 
cake. Secondly, this claim is overplayed 
extravagantly in democracy by large and 
vocal groups whose burden of 
backwardness has been substantially 
lightened by the march of time and 
measures of better education and more 
opportunities of employment, but wish to 
wear the 'weaker section' label as a 
means to score over their near-equals 
formally categorised as the upper 
brackets." 

 25. A few other aspects for rejecting 
caste as the basis for identifying social 
and educational backwardness may be 
briefly noted. If State patronage for 
preferred treatment accepts caste as the 
only insignia for determining social and 
educational backwardness, the danger 
looms large that this approach alone 
would legitimise and perpetuate caste 
system. It does not go well with our 
proclaimed secular character as 
enshrined in the Preamble to the 
Constitution. The assumption that all 
members of same caste a re equally 
socially and educationally backward is 
not well-founded. Such an approach 
provides an over-simplification of a 
complex problem of identifying the social 
and educational backwardness. The 
Chairman of the Backward Classes 
Commission, set up in 1953, after having 
finalised the report, concluded that "it 
would have been better if we could 
determine the criteria of backwardness 
on principles other than caste". Lastly it 
is recognised without dissent that the 
caste based reservation has been 
usurped by the economically well-placed 
section in the same caste. To illustrate, it 
may be pointed that some years ago, I 
came across a petition for special leave 
against the decision of the Punjab and 
Haryana High Court in which the 
reservation of  2=  per cent for admission 
to medical and engineering colleges in 
favour of Majhabi Sikhs was challenged 
by none other than the upper crust of the 
members of the Scheduled castes 
amongst Sikhs in Punjab, proving that 
the labeled weak exploits the really 
weaker. Add to this, the findings of the 
Research Planning Scheme of sociologists 
assisting the Mandal Commission when it 
observed: "while determining the criteria 
of socially and educationally backward 
classes, social backwardness should be 
considered to be the critical element and 
educational backwardness to be the 
linked element though not necessarily 
derived from the former". The team 
ultimately concluded that "social 
backwardness refers to ascribed status, 
and it considered social backwardness as 
the critical element and educational 
backwardness to be the linked though 
not derived element". The attempt is to 
identify socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens. The caste, 
as is understood in Hindu Society, is 
unknown to Muslims, Christians, Parsis, 
Jews etc. Caste criterion would not 
furnish a reliable yardstick to identify 
socially and educationally backward 
group in the aforementioned communities 
though economic backwardness would. 

 28. Reservation in one or other form has 
been there for decades. If a survey is 
made with reference to families in various 
castes considered to be socially and 
educationally backward, about the 
benefits of preferred treatment, it would 
unmistakably show that the benefits of 
reservations are snatched away by the 
top creamy layer of the backward castes. 
This has to be avoided at any cost. 

56.	Significantly in Indra Sawhney No.1 it was emphatically 
noted as follows: 
"520. Society does not remain static. The 
industrialisation and the urbanisation which 
necessarily followed in its wake, the advance 
on political, social and economic fronts made 
particularly after the commencement of the 
Constitution, the social reform movements of 
the last several decades, the spread of 
education and the advantages of the special 
provisions including reservations secured so 
far, have all undoubtedly seen at least some 
individuals and families in the backward 
classes, however small in number, gaining 
sufficient means to develop their capacities to 
compete with others in every field. That is an 
undeniable fact. Legally, therefore, they are not 
entitled to be any longer called as part of the 
backward classes whatever their original 
birthmark. It can further hardly be argued that 
once a backward class, always a backward 
class. That would defeat the very purpose of 
the special provisions made in the Constitution 
for the advancement of the backward classes, 
and for enabling them to come to the level of 
and to compete with the forward classes, as 
equal citizens. On the other hand, to continue 
to confer upon such advanced sections from 
the backward classes the special benefits, 
would amount to treating equals unequally 
violating the equality provisions of the 
Constitution. Secondly, to rank them with the 
rest of the backward classes would equally 
violate the right to equality of the rest in those 
classes, since it would amount to treating the 
unequals equally. What is more, it will lead to 
perverting the objectives of the special 
constitutional provisions since the forwards 
among the backward classes will thereby be 
enabled to lap up all the special benefits to the 
exclusion and at the cost of the rest in those 
classes, thus keeping the rest in perpetual 
backwardness. The object of the special 
constitutional provisions is not to uplift a few 
individuals and families in the backward 
classes but to ensure the advancement of the 
backward classes as a whole. Hence, taking 
out the forwards from among the backward 
classes is not only permissible but obligatory 
under the Constitution. However, it is 
necessary to add that just as the 
backwardness of the backward groups cannot 
be measured in terms of the forwardness of the 
forward groups, so also the forwardness of the 
forwards among the backward classes cannot 
be measured in terms of the backwardness of 
the backward sections of the said classes. It 
has to be judged on the basis of the social 
capacities gained by them to compete with the 
forward classes. So long as the individuals 
belonging to the backward classes do not 
develop sufficient capacities of their own to 
compete with others, they can hardly be 
classified as forward. 
	xx			xx			xx
629. More backward and backward is an 
illusion. No constitutional exercise is called for 
it. What is required is practical approach to 
the problem. The collectivity or the group may 
be backward class but the individuals from 
that class may have achieved the social status 
or economic affluence. Disentitle them from 
claiming reservation. Therefore, while reserving 
posts for backward classes, the departments 
should make a condition precedent that every 
candidate must disclose the annual income of 
the parents beyond which one could not be 
considered to be backward. What should be 
that limit can be determined by the 
appropriate State. Income apart, provision 
should be made that wards of those backward 
classes of persons who have achieved a 
particular status in society either political or 
social or economic or if their parents are in 
higher services then such individuals should 
be precluded to avoid monopolisation of the 
services reserved for backward classes by a 
few. Creamy layer, thus, shall stand 
eliminated. And once a group or collectivity 
itself is found to have achieved the 
constitutional objective then it should be 
excluded from the list of backward class. 
Therefore, 
  (1)   No reservation can be made on economic 
criteria.

  (2)   It may be under Article 16(4) if such 
class satisfies the test of inadequate 
representation.

  (3)   Exclusion of creamy layer is a social 
purpose. Any legislative or executive action to 
remove such persons individually or 
collectively cannot be constitutionally invalid. 
	Xx			xx			xx
 
 790. 'Means-test' in this discussion signifies 
imposition of an income limit, for the purpose 
of excluding persons (from the backward class) 
whose income is above the said limit. This 
submission is very often referred to as the 
"creamy layer" argument. Petitioners submit 
that some members of the designated 
backward classes are highly advanced socially 
as well as economically and educationally. It is 
submitted that they constitute the forward 
section of that particular backward class  as 
forward as any other forward class member  
and that they are lapping up all the benefits of 
reservations meant for that class, without 
allowing the benefits to reach the truly 
backward members of that class. These 
persons are by no means backward and with 
them a class cannot be treated as backward. It 
is pointed out that since Jayasree almost every 
decision has accepted the validity of this 
submission. 

 791. On the other hand, the learned counsel 
for the States of Bihar, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and 
other counsel for respondents strongly oppose 
any such distinction. It is submitted that once 
a class is identified as a backward class after 
applying the relevant criteria including the 
economic one, it is not permissible to apply the 
economic criteria once again and sub-divide a 
backward class into two sub-categories. 
Counsel for the State of Tamil Nadu submitted 
further that at one stage (in July 1979) the 
State o f Tamil Nadu did indeed prescribe such 
an income limit but had to delete it in view of 
the practical difficulties encountered and also 
in view of the representations received. In this 
behalf, the learned counsel invited our 
attention to Chapter 7-H (pages 60 to 62) of 
the Ambashankar Commission (Tamil Nadu 
Second Backward Classes Commission) 
Report. According to the respondents the 
argument of 'creamy layer' is but a mere ruse, 
a trick, to deprive the backward classes of the 
benefit of reservations. It is submitted that no 
member of backward class has come forward 
with this plea and that it ill becomes the 
members of forward classes to raise this point. 
Strong reliance is placed upon the 
observations of Chinnappa Reddy, J in 
Vasanth kumar to the following effect (SCC 
p.763, para 72) 

" .. .. One must, however, enter a caveat to the 
criticism that the benefits of reservation are 
often snatched away by the top creamy layer of 
backward class or caste. That a few of the 
seats and posts reserved for backward classes 
are snatched away by the more fortunate 
among them is not to say that reservation is 
not necessary. This is bound to happen in a 
competitive society such as ours. Are not the 
unreserved seats and posts snatched away, in 
the same way, by the top creamy layer of 
society itself? Seats reserved for the backward 
classes are taken away by the top layers 
amongst them on the same principle of merit 
on which the unreserved seats are taken away 
by the top layers of society. How can it be bad 
if reserved seats and posts are snatched away 
by the creamy layer of backward classes, if 
such snatching away of unreserved posts by 
the top creamy layer of society itself is not 
bad?" 

 792. In our opinion, it is not a question of 
permissibility or desirability of such test but 
one of proper and more appropriate 
identification of a class  a backward class. 
The very concept of a class denotes a number 
of persons having certain common traits which 
distinguish them from the others. In a 
backward class under clause (4) of Article 16, 
if the connecting link is the social 
backwardness, it should broadly be the same 
in a given class. If some of the members are far 
too advanced socially (which in the context, 
necessarily means economically and, may also 
mean educationally) the connecting thread 
between them and the remaining class snaps. 
They would be misfits in the class. After 
excluding them alone, would the class be a 
compact class. In fact, such exclusion benefits 
the truly backward. Difficulty, however, really 
lies in drawing the line  how and where to 
draw the line? For, while drawing the line, it 
should be ensured that it does not result in 
taking away with one hand what is given by 
the other. The basis of exclusion should not 
merely be economic, unless, of course, the 
economic advancement is so high that it 
necessarily means social advancement. Let us 
illustrate the point. A member of backward 
class, say a member of carpenter caste, goes to 
Middle East and works there as a carpenter. If 
you take his annual income in rupees, it would 
be fairly high from the Indian standard. Is he 
to be excluded from the Backward Class? Are 
his children in India to be deprived of the 
benefit of Article 16(4)? Situation may, 
however, be different, if he rises so high 
economically as to become  say a factory 
owner himself. In such a situation, his social 
status also rises. He himself would be in a 
position to provide employment to others. In 
such a case, his income is merely a measure of 
his social status. Even otherwise there are 
several practical difficulties too in imposing an 
income ceiling. For example, annual income of 
Rs.36,000 may not count for much in a city 
like Bombay, Delhi or Calcutta whereas it may 
be a handsome income in rural India 
anywhere. The line to be drawn must be a 
realistic one. Another question would be, 
should such a line be uniform for the entire 
country or a given State or should it differ from 
rural to urban areas and so on. Further, 
income from agriculture may be difficult to 
assess and, therefore, in the case of 
agriculturists, the line may have to be drawn 
with reference to the extent of holding. While 
the income of a person can be taken as a 
measure of his social advancement, the limit to 
be prescribed should not be such as to result 
in taking away with one hand what is given 
with the other. The income limit must be such 
as to mean and signify social advancement. At 
the same time, it must be recognised that 
there are certain positions, the occupants of 
which can be treated as socially advanced 
without any further enquiry. For example, if a 
member of a designated backward class 
becomes a member of IAS or IPS or any other 
All India Service, his status is society (social 
status) rises; he is no longer socially 
disadvantaged. His children get full 
opportunity to realize their potential. They are 
in no way handicapped in the race of life.  
793. Keeping in mind all these considerations, 
we direct the Government of India to specify 
the basis of exclusion  whether on the basis 
of income, extent of holding or otherwise  of 
'creamy layer'. This shall be done as early as 
possible, but not exceeding four months. On 
such specification persons falling within the 
net of exclusionary rule shall cease to be the 
members of the Other Backward Classes 
(covered by the expression 'backward class of 
citizens') for the purpose of Article 16(4). The 
impugned Office Memorandums dated August 
13, 1990 and September 25, 1991 shall be 
implemented subject only to such specification 
and exclusion of socially advanced persons 
from the backward classes contemplated by 
the said O.M. In other words, after the expiry 
of four months from today, the implementation 
of the said O.M. shall be subject to the 
exclusion of the 'creamy layer' in accordance 
with the criteria to be specified by the 
Government of India and not otherwise".

57.    In  Indra Sawhney v. Union of India (1996) 6 SCC 506) 
at page 508) it was noted as follows : 
"3. Thereafter the matter again came up before 
the Court on 20-3-1995. Finding that the State 
of Kerala has not taken any steps, this Court 
issued notice to show cause why action should 
not be taken for non-compliance of this Court's 
order. Again the matter came up on 10-7-
1995. Even on that date no report of 
compliance was submitted to the Court; 
instead an affidavit sworn to by the Chief 
Secretary to the State was handed over 
explaining the circumstances why the 
implementation of the judgment was delayed. 
xx		xx			xx
 
 5. In the circumstances, out of sheer 
exhaustion and having regard to the fact that 
the constitutionality of the Kerala Act 16 of 
1995 is pending disposal before this Court, we 
have decided to get the information ourselves 
regarding "creamy layer" issue through a High 
Level Committee. 

6. Accordingly, we request the learned Chief 
Justice of the Kerala High Court to appoint a 
retired Judge of the High Court to be the 
Chairman of the High Level Committee who 
will induct not more than 4 members from 
various walks of life to identify the "creamy 
layer" among "the designated other backward 
classes" in Kerala State in the light of the 
ruling of this Court in Mandal case  and 
forward the report to this Court within 3 
months from the date of receipt of this order."  

 58.	In Indra Sawhney No. 2 it was observed as follows: 
"7. Our Constitution is wedded to the concept 
of equality and equality is a basic feature. 
Under Article 15(2), there is a prohibition that 
the State shall not discriminate against any 
citizen on the grounds only of religion, race, 
caste, sex and place of birth or any of them. It 
is equally true that ours is a caste-ridden 
society. Still, it is a constitutional mandate not 
to discriminate on the basis of caste alone. 
Provisions can be made for the upliftment of 
socially and educationally backward classes, 
Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or for 
women and children. Article 16(4) empowers 
the States for making any provision for 
reservation in appointments or posts in favour 
of any backward class of citizens which, in the 
opinion of the State, is not adequately 
represented in the services under the State. 
Reservation is permissible ( i ) in favour of any 
backward class of citizens; and ( ii ) if it is not 
adequately represented in services under the 
State.  

 8. Caste only cannot be the basis for 
reservation. Reservation can be for a backward 
class citizen of a particular caste. Therefore, 
from that caste, the creamy layer and the non-
backward class of citizens are to be excluded. 
If the caste is to be taken into consideration 
then for finding out the socially and 
economically backward class, the creamy layer 
of the caste is to be eliminated for granting 
benefit of reservation, because that creamy 
layer cannot be termed as socially and 
economically backward. These questions are 
exhaustively dealt with by a nine-Judge Bench 
of this Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of 
India  and it has been specially held that "only 
caste" cannot be the basis for reservation.  

 9. Inclusion of castes in the list of backward 
classes cannot be mechanical and cannot be 
done without adequate relevant data. Nor can 
it be done for extraneous reasons 
 Likewise, periodic examination of a backward 
class could lead to its exclusion if it ceases to 
be socially backward or if it is adequately 
represented in the services. Once backward, 
always backward is not acceptable. In any 
case, the "creamy layer" has no place in the 
reservation system. 
10. If forward classes are mechanically 
included in the list of backward classes or if 
the creamy layer among backward classes is 
not excluded, then the benefits of reservation 
will not reach the really backward among the 
backward classes. Most of the benefits will 
then be knocked away by the forward castes 
and the creamy layer. That will leave the truly 
backward, backward forever.   
		xx			xx		xx
 
 13. In Indra Sawhney on the question of 
exclusion of the "creamy layer" from the 
backward classes, there was agreement among 
eight out of the nine learned Judges of this 
Court. There were five separate judgments in 
this behalf which required the "creamy layer" 
to be identified and excluded. 
		xx		xx		xx
 
 22. As appears from the judgments of six out 
of the eight Judges, viz. Jeevan Reddy (for 
himself and three others), Sawant and Sahai, 
JJ.  (i.e. six learned Judges out of nine),  
they specifically refer to those in higher 
services like IAS, IPS and All India Services or 
near about as persons who have reached a 
higher level of social advancement and 
economic status and therefore as a matter of 
law, such persons are declared not entitled to 
be treated as backward. They are to be treated 
as creamy layer "without further inquiry". 
Likewise, persons living in sufficient affluence 
who are able to provide employment to others 
are to be treated as having reached a higher 
social status on account of their affluence, and 
therefore outside the backward class. Those 
holding higher levels of agricultural 
landholdings or getting income from property, 
beyond a limit, have to be excluded from the 
backward classes. This, in our opinion, is a 
judicial " declaration " made by this Court. 
	Xx		xx		xx
 
 27. As the "creamy layer" in the backward 
class is to be treated "on a par" with the 
forward classes and is not entitled to benefits 
of reservation, it is obvious that if the "creamy 
layer" is not excluded, there will be 
discrimination and violation of Articles 14 and 
16(1) inasmuch as equals (forwards and 
creamy layer of backward classes) cannot be 
treated unequally . Again, non-exclusion of 
creamy layer will also be violative of Articles 
14, 16(1) and 16(4) of the Constitution of India 
since unequals (the creamy layer) cannot be 
treated as equals , that is to say, equal to the 
rest of the backward class. These twin aspects 
of discrimination are specifically elucidated in 
the judgment of Sawant, J. where the learned 
Judge stated as follows: (SCC p.   553, para 
520) 
"To continue to confer upon 
such advanced sections special 
benefits, would amount to 
treating equals unequally. 
Secondly, to rank them with 
the rest of the backward 
classes would amount to 
treating the unequals equally."

Thus, any executive or legislative action 
refusing to exclude the creamy layer from the 
benefits of reservation will be violative of 
Articles 14 and 16(1) and also of Article 16(4). 
We shall examine the validity of Sections 3, 4 
and 6 in the light of the  above principle. 
Xx			xx		xx
 
 64. The Preamble to the Constitution of India 
emphasises the principle of equality as basic to 
our Constitution. In Kesavananda Bharati v. 
State of Kerala it was ruled that even 
constitutional amendments which offended the 
basic structure of the Constitution would be 
ultra vires the basic structure. Sikri, C.J. laid 
stress on the basic features enumerated in the 
Preamble to the Constitution and said that 
there were other basic features too which 
could be gathered from the constitutional 
scheme (para 506-A of SCC). Equality was one 
of the basic features referred to in the 
Preamble to our Constitution. Shelat and 
Grover, JJ. also referred to the basic rights 
referred to in the Preamble. They specifically 
referred to equality (paras 520 and 535-A of 
SCC). Hegde and Shelat, JJ. also referred to 
the Preamble (paras 648, 652). Ray, J. (as he 
then was) also did so (para 886). Jaganmohan 
Reddy, J. too referred to the Preamble and the 
equality doctrine (para 1159). Khanna, J. 
accepted this position (para 1471). Mathew, J. 
referred to equality as a basic feature (para 
1621). Dwivedi, J. (paras 1882, 1883) and 
Chandrachud, J. (as he then was) (see para  
2086) accepted this position. 

 65. What we mean to say is that Parliament 
and the legislature in this country cannot 
transgress the basic feature of the 
Constitution, namely, the principle of equality 
enshrined in Article 14 of which Article 16(1) is 
a facet. Whether the creamy layer is not 
excluded or whether forward castes get 
included in the list of backward classes , the 
position will be the same, namely, that there 
will be a breach not only of Article 14 but of 
the basic structure of the Constitution. The 
non-exclusion of the creamy layer or the 
inclusion of forward castes in the list of 
backward classes will, therefore, be totally 
illegal. Such an illegality offending the root of 
the Constitution of India cannot be allowed to 
be perpetuated even by constitutional 
amendment. The Kerala Legislature is, 
therefore, least competent to perpetuate such 
an illegal discrimination. What even 
Parliament cannot do, the Kerala Legislature 
cannot achieve." 

59.	Though in M. Nagaraj's case (supra) some observations of 
general nature have been made so far as the applicability of 
the principles to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are 
concerned, really that case did not concern with Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Similar is the position here. The    
focus on the identity test in M. Nagaraj's case (supra) is 
unexceptionable. At paras 80 and 110, it was noted as follows:	
"80. Before concluding, we may refer to the 
judgment of this Court in M.G. 
Badappanavar. In that case the facts were as 
follows. Appellants were general candidates. 
They contended that when they and the 
reserved candidates were appointed at Level-1 
and junior reserved candidates got promoted 
earlier  on the basis of roster- points to Level-2 
and again by way of roster-points to Level-3, 
and when the senior general candidate got 
promoted to Level-3, then the general 
candidate would become senior to the reserved 
candidate at Level-3. At Level-3, the reserved 
candidate should have been considered along 
with the senior general candidate for 
promotion to Level-4. In support of their 
contention, appellants relied upon the 
judgment of the Constitution Bench in Ajit 
Singh (II). The above contentions raised by the 
appellants were rejected by the tribunal. 
Therefore, the general candidates came to this 
Court in appeal. This Court found on facts that 
the Service Rule concerned did not 
contemplate computation of seniority in 
respect of roster promotions. Placing reliance 
on the judgment of this Court in Ajit Singh (I) 
and in Virpal Singh, this Court held that 
roster promotions were meant only for the 
limited purpose of due representation of 
backward classes at various levels of service 
and, therefore, such roster promotions did not 
confer consequential seniority to the roster-
point promotee. In Ajit Singh (II) , the circular 
which gave seniority to the roster-point 
promotees was held to be violative of Articles 
14 and 16. It was further held in M.G. 
Badappanavar that equality is the basic 
feature of the Constitution and any treatment 
of equals as unequals or any treatment of 
unequals as equals violated the basic 
structure of the Constitution. For this 
proposition, this Court placed reliance on the 
judgment in Indra Sawhney while holding 
that if creamy layer among backward classes 
were given some benefits as backward classes, 
it will amount to equals being treated 
unequals. Applying the creamy layer test, this 
Court held that if roster-point promotees are 
given consequential seniority, it will violate the 
equality principle which is part of the basic 
structure of the Constitution and in which 
event, even Article 16(4A) cannot be of any 
help to the reserved category candidates. This 
is the only judgment of this Court delivered by 
three-Judge bench saying that if roster-point 
promotees are given the benefit of 
consequential seniority, it will result in 
violation of equality principle which is part of 
the basic structure of the Constitution. 
Accordingly, the judgment of the tribunal was 
set aside.
		xx			xx		xx
110. As stated above, the boundaries of the 
width of the power, namely, the ceiling-limit of 
50% (the numerical benchmark), the principle 
of creamy layer, the compelling reasons, 
namely, backwardness, inadequacy of 
representation and the overall administrative 
efficiency are not obliterated by the impugned 
amendments. At the appropriate time, we have 
to consider the law as enacted by various 
States providing for reservation if challenged. 
At that time we have to see whether limitations 
on the exercise of power are violated. The State 
is free to exercise its discretion of providing for 
reservation subject to limitation, namely, that 
there must exist compelling reasons of 
backwardness, inadequacy of representation in 
a class of post(s) keeping in mind the overall 
administrative efficiency. It is made clear that 
even if the State has reasons to make 
reservation, as stated above, if the impugned 
law violates any of the above substantive limits 
on the width of the power the same would be 
liable to be set aside."

60.	There is an interesting article by an author dealing with 
Affirmative Action which reads as follows: 
 	"In his much referred to speech on 26 
November 1949, Dr. Ambedkar said that India 
was wanting in its recognition of the principle 
of fraternity. What does fraternity mean? 
Fraternity means a sense of common 
brotherhood of all Indians - of India being one 
people. The virtues of liberty by themselves do 
not create fraternity. This is why several liberal 
theorists are unsure about whether or not 
state interventions should be allowed for when 
the issue of overcoming disprivileges are 
concerned. The central concern then is how to 
inculcate a sense of `common brotherhood' 
among people with divergent histories and who 
occupy vastly different positions in the 
economic and social structure of a society.

Before we go further on discussing the 
specifics of caste and reservations in India it is 
worth recording that liberty and equality can 
sometimes be contradictorily positioned. This 
is why it is important for democracy to redress 
these community-based grievances within a 
framework that does not violate liberal 
principles. While the individual needs to be 
protected, there are individuals in certain 
groups and communities that need safeguards 
and support as well. After all it must be 
remembered that communities do not create 
citizens, but that there are citizens within 
communities. Also, while it is rather risky to 
say that communities have rights, there is no  
doubt at all that within liberal democracies, 
individuals have  rights. Indeed, these rights 
were secured historically so that individuals 
did not have to be burdened by community 
and ascriptive pressures on them.

The rationale behind affirmative action is 
that it releases suppressed talents and 
expands the pool of social assets in society for 
the general good. If today we are looking for  a  
justification for affirmative action in this 
fashion, several decades ago it was precisely 
this enlarging of the social pool of talents that 
recommended equal treatment for women. As 
L.T. Hobhouse argued then that when women 
are repressed then there is a loss of all the 
elements in the common stock which the free 
play of the woman's mind would contribute. By 
increasing the sum of realized talents in 
society individuals can actually gain greater 
inter-subjectivity in their everyday lives. As the 
set of resemblances between them is now so 
much larger, they can practice, pace Rawls, 
the moral precept of participating in one 
another's fate. In this process, fraternal values 
of citizenship gain materiality and fulfilment. It 
should be recognized that fraternity can only 
come about through a basic set of 
resemblances between citizens. This 
conception of resemblances is about citizens 
being equally able to avail of institutional 
facilities that ensure their acquisition of those 
skills that are considered to be socially 
valuable. In other words, social opportunities 
exist for individual self-expansion, and it is 
only individuals now who can exclude 
themselves. If grinding poverty comes in the 
way of acquiring such socially valuable skills, 
then those blocks should be met by 
developmental interventions such as the anti-
poverty programmes. But on no account 
should the removal of poverty be made 
synonymous with reservations. Reservations 
are only meant to create a measure of 
confidence and dignity among those who didn't 
dare dream of an alternative life. But that 
alone cannot create structural conditions that 
address the root causes of poverty.
If quality education and the imparting of 
socially valuable skills are provided across the 
board through reservations, then that would 
take care of the complaint that affirmative 
action is largely about the equality of results. 
Rawls' principle of justice as fairness only says 
that offices should be open to all. But what if 
people do not qualify for these offices because 
their potentialities have remained unrealized 
on account of inadequate qualifications arising 
from a history of discrimination compounded 
by poverty, or, indeed, because of sub-
standard education? Does it mean that, 
through positive discrimination and 
reservations, they should be given these jobs 
anyway regardless of the welfare of 
institutions? In this connection, Andre 
Beteille's warning that affirmative action 
should be sensitive to institutional well-being 
as well needs to be recalled. Beteille sifted 
between the various imperatives that different 
organizations are subsumed under and 
accordingly advised a careful calibration of 
reservations such that these provisions of 
performance do not undermine efficiency of 
performance. The resemblances that are being 
advocated in the context of affirmative action 
should not be interpreted in terms of 
homogeneous `sameness'. Sameness is what 
medieval religious fundamentalists aim for. On 
the other hand, the set of resemblances in a 
constitutional democracy enhances equality 
and not sameness by providing identical  
opportunities to all for self-expression and 
development. Citizenship is not about the 
sameness of lifestyles or of income.  Marshall's 
notion of citizenship as  a status that tends 
towards equality should be interpreted in this 
light. According to Marshall, the equality that 
citizenship guarantees should be the 
foundation on which other kinds of differences 
can develop. 

It will no doubt be the case that 
differences will exist even after a  minimum set 
of resemblances is established. But these will 
no longer  be outcomes of the accidents of 
birth. When diversity exists outside of choice 
then that is not a state of affairs that a 
democratic society can rejoice in. Affirmative 
action is instrumental in enlarging the scope of 
difference and diversity, but it succeeds in 
doing so by first ensuring that citizens 
resemble one another at a very critical level 
namely in their ability to acquire socially 
valuable skills. 

Affirmative action gets somewhat complicated 
in India on account  of caste politics.
Undeniably, India is the most stratified 
society in the world. Over and above caste 
differentiations there are huge income 
disparities, religious and community 
differences that are deeply engraved into 
everyday social relations. No doubt, the nature 
of caste and community interactions has 
changed over time, but considerations along 
ascriptive lines still remain important markers, 
both at the  public and private domains.

Not only are we now confronted by 
identity assertions  of earthy peasant castes, 
that were earlier ranked as lowly shudras (or 
menials), but also, of those who, till recently, 
were called 'untouchables'. Now we also know 
that none of these castes had ever ideologically 
accepted their degraded status. Yet they lived 
out their humble lives quietly for generations 
for fear of offending  the privileged strata. 
We now know more of their origin tales 
that boast of the elevated positions they once 
held before an unsuspected chicanery, a lost 
war, or a mercurial god, demoted them to lowly 
rungs in popular perceptions. Today these 
tales are an important source of symbolic 
energy for caste mobilizations and identity 
assertions. Now that the Mandal 
recommendations are in place, reservations 
are not just for the Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes, but for the so-called other Backward 
Castes as well. While there are a large number 
of castes listed as Backward, the demand for 
reservations for this category has been 
spearheaded by the class of owner-cultivators, 
or peasant proprietors. Before we assess 
Mandal reforms it would be useful to know 
how these peasant castes emerged.
After the zamindari abolition came into 
effect, adult franchise and land-to-the-tiller 
programme together forced the earlier landed 
castes slowly to cede ground in the villages. 
Soon, however, traditional peasant castes such 
as the Ahirs, Kurmis, Koeris, Lodhs, Rajputs 
and Jats began to dominate the political scape 
of northern India. In the southern State of 
Tamil Nadu, the Vanniyars and Thevars have 
become assertive, and in Karnataka control 
was wrested in the mid-1950s from the 
traditional rural elite within the Congress 
Party by the Vokkaligas and Linagayats.
	xx			xx		xx

In pursuance of Article 340 of the 
Constitution, the Kalelkar Commission was set 
up in 1955 but it could not come to any 
satisfactory conclusion about who should be 
legitimately considered as OBCs. The Mandal 
Commission came into existence in 1980 and 
it promptly came up with a long list of 3,743 
backward castes on the basis of social, 
economic and educational backwardness. The 
Mandal Commission's recommendations were 
implemented in 1990 by the then Prime 
Minister VP Singh. This meant that a further 
29 per cent of seats in educational institutions 
and government jobs would now be reserved 
for OBCs.

The implementation of reservations for 
OBCs set off a furore of protests, including a 
few suicides, all over the country by those who 
are considered to be members of forward 
castes. Many felt that reservations for OBCs 
were not warranted for two reasons. First, this 
would make India a caste society by law; and, 
second, because many of those who are 
considered as OBCs are really quite powerful 
and dominant in rural India. The obvious 
reference was to Jats and Yadavs. A majority 
of social anthropologists wrote against 
reservations for OBCs primarily on these 
grounds. Andre Beteille's criticism of the 
Mandal Commission recommendations was 
widely commented upon. He distinguishes 
between reservations for OBCs following 
Mandal recommendations and the reservations 
that were already granted in the Constitution 
for Scheduled Castes and Tribes. While 
provisions for Scheduled Castes and Tribes 
were with the intention of reaching towards 
greater equality, reservations for OBCs were 
really to bring about a balance of power on the 
calculus of caste. The kind of deprivations that 
ex-untouchables (Scheduled Castes) and 
Adivasis (Scheduled Tribes) encountered for 
centuries can in no way be compared to the 
traditional condition of the OBCs. Besides, 
many OBCs are quite powerful in rural India, 
both economically and politically. In fact, the 
Mandal Commission recommendations were 
actually giving in to a powerful rural lobby that 
did not really care for equality of opportunities 
as much as it did for equality of results.

		xx			xx			xx
There are two considerations that escape 
many uncritical applications of affirmative 
action. First, affirmative action must resist any 
tendency whereby its beneficiaries become 
vested interests. And secondly, it must 
eventually seek its own dissolution. While the 
second may be far away, it is by paying 
attention to the first issue that it is possible for 
affirmative action to eventually annihilate 
itself. Paradoxical as it may appear, but when 
this happens it is then that positive 
discrimination has finally triumphed.

Affirmative action fails to reach this final 
destination when it is inconsistently applied, 
or when its beneficiaries form vested interest 
bloc within a democratic electoral system on 
the basis of ascriptive identity alone. The latter 
poses a stronger practical and intellectual  
challenge to the policy of affirmative action. As 
long as historical  disprivileges and economic 
backwardness go together and the relationship 
between them is statistically very strong, 
colour or caste membership can act as ready 
reckoners for targeting beneficiaries of 
affirmative action. This, however, does not 
mean that membership in these communities 
should advantage individuals in perpetuity  
once they are able to develop the minimum set 
of resemblances. Therefore, as and when those 
who belong to targeted categories for 
affirmative action acquire socially useful 
talents and attributes, they should contribute 
them to the society as a whole, and not employ  
them only for sectional advantages.

Consequently, those who benefit from 
this policy owe it to society to  put their newly 
acquired social talents back into the collective 
social pool. This would mean that they would 
automatically fall  outside the scope of 
affirmative action programme in the future.  
The net would no longer cover them as they 
already have socially  useful assets. Indeed the 
society will be richer and better endowed on 
account of it as the beneficiaries of affirmative 
action will now begin to contribute to the 
social pool of talents. This would both release  
and add to social and material resources 
required for continuing with the policy aimed 
at the enhancement of resemblances. As a 
result, society will progressively acquire a 
higher strike rate with the policy of affirmative 
action by reaching out to those who have thus 
far fallen outside its ambit. By increasing the 
number of those who possess the minimum set 
of resemblances, the society has now a  larger 
wealth of talents in a variety of fields and 
specialities than  it had before. This is how 
affirmative action, which is aimed at the 
historically most disadvantaged sections, 
ultimately improves the lot of everybody in 
society. If, on the other hand, either colour or 
race, which are only ready reckoners, become 
permanent considerations, without taking into 
account biographical profiles of actual and 
potential beneficiaries, then that would inhibit 
fraternity and sow seeds of permanent 
divisions in society.

Affirmative action begins by placing the 
assets of the better off in a  collective pool, not 
for redistribution, but to create the 
infrastructure that is needed to enhance the 
minimum set of resemblances necessary for 
substantive citizenship. With the help of this 
capital, socially valuable assets are now 
created in sites where there were none. This 
measure has a strong practical dimension for 
out of this collective pooling new assets are 
being created. The creation of such new assets 
is possible because the initial pooling of assets 
of the privileged section allows the society to 
underwrite the expenses incurred for the 
establishment of certain baseline similarities 
in society as a whole. As the most important 
feature in this case is not one's ascriptive 
badge, but the creation of socially valuable 
assets, it is expected that those who have been 
the beneficiaries of the scheme will gradually 
slip out of the net. They will cease to receive 
from the collective pool and instead will begin 
to contribute to it. As far as public policy is 
concerned they are no long members of certain 
designated castes or communities. They are 
now simply citizens.

In passing it is worth putting in 
perspective that the difference between 
reservations in India and affirmative action in 
America is that the former talks about 
extirpating caste whereas the latter is 
interested primarily in representing races. If 
the accent is on representation then the 
ascriptive factor becomes a permanent badge 
that can never be overcome. Again, Americans 
believe in race representation, not in quotas, 
and in not sacrificing standards for social 
justice. But the great similarity between the 
two forms of preferential policy is that in both 
cases it is the public sector where positive 
discrimination is effectively realized. In 
America, the State encourages private sector 
units to employ people of diverse backgrounds 
without specifying quotas for different races. If 
these enterprises can show a fair racial mix 
then they can get preferential contracts from 
the government. The State cannot force any 
private sector unit to implement affirmative 
action. It is a combination of goodwill and 
rewards that takes affirmative action forward 
in the private sector of America. For example, 
Bob Jones University does not receive any 
public money and, therefore, it refuses to 
accept affirmative action, even of the most 
muted kind. It is only when organizations 
depend on state funding, or when they want to 
be rewarded by the State, that policy of 
affirmative action comes to life."

61.	It has been rightly observed in Indra Sawhney No. 2 
(supra) whether creamy layer is not excluded or whether 
forward classes can be excluded in the list of backward 
classes, the position would be the same and there will be 
breach not only of Article 14 but of the basic structure of the 
Constitution. As was rightly observed in the said case, non 
exclusion of the creamy layer or inclusion of forward castes in 
the lists of backward classes will be totally illegal. The illegality 
offends the roots and foundation of the Constitution and 
cannot be allowed to be perpetuated. 

62.	In Nair Service Society's case (supra) this Court observed 
as follows:
"54. This Court, thus, has categorically laid 
down the law that determination of creamy 
layer is a part of the constitutional scheme."

63.	In our view, even non exclusion of the creamy layer for 
the purpose of admission to the educational institutions 
cannot be countenanced. It is inconceivable that a person who 
belongs to the creamy layer  is socially and educationally 
backward. The backward status vanishes when somebody 
becomes part of the creamy layer.

64.	In Vasant Kumar's case (supra) it was aptly described 
that the benefits of reservation are snatched away by the top 
creamy layer of the backward classes and this has to be 
avoided at any cost. By inclusion of the creamy layer or in 
other words non inclusion thereof a fresh lease of life to those 
who should have been left out is given. Their continuance 
would mean keeping weakest amongst the weak always weak 
and leaving the fortunate ones  to enjoy the benefits. If the 
ultimate aim is a casteless and classless society in line with 
the dream of the Constitution framers that has to be chewed 
out. As  Father of the Nation had once said if the caste system 
as we know is an anchronism, then it must go. There is a 
feeling and it cannot be said without reason that reservation 
hits at the root of this belief and instead of its obliteration 
there is perceivable perpetuation. It is true that obliteration 
cannot be done immediately or within a short span of time but 
that is no answer to the lack of seriousness in seeking 
obliteration.

65.	In Indra Sawhney No.1 (supra) the following observations 
on the question of giving priority over reservation are of 
significance. It was held: 
"293. Preference without reservation may be 
adopted in favour of the chosen classes of 
citizens by prescribing for them a longer period 
for passing a test or by awarding additional 
marks or granting other advantages like 
relaxation of age or other minimum 
requirements. (See the preferential treatment 
in State of Kerala and Anr. v. N.M. Thomas 
and Ors. (1976) 1 SCR 906). Furthermore, it 
would be within the discretion of the State to 
provide financial assistance to such persons by 
way of grant, scholarships, fee concessions etc. 
Such preferences or advantages are like 
temporary crutches for additional support to 
enable the members of the backward and other 
disadvantaged classes to march forward and 
compete with the rest of the people. These 
preferences are extended to them because of 
their inability otherwise to compete effectively 
in open selections on the basis of merits for 
appointment to posts in public services and 
the like or for selection to academic courses. 
Such preferences can be extended to all 
disadvantaged classes of citizens, whether or 
not they are victims of prior discrimination. 
What qualifies persons for preference is 
backwardness or disadvantage of any kind 
which the State has a responsibility to 
ameliorate. The blind and the deaf, the dumb 
and the maimed, and other handicapped 
persons qualify for preference. So do all other 
classes of citizens who are at a comparative 
disadvantage for whatever reason, and 
whether or not they are victims of prior 
discrimination. All these persons may be 
beneficiaries of preferences short of 
reservation. Any such preference, although 
discriminatory on its face, may be justified as 
a benign classification for affirmative action 
warranted by a compelling state interest.
294. In addition to such preferences, quotas 
may be provided exclusively reserving posts in 
public services or seats in academic 
institutions for backward people entitled to 
such protection. Reservation is intended to 
redress backwardness of a higher degree. 
Reservation prima facie is the very antithesis 
of a free and open selection. It is a 
discriminatory exclusion of the disfavoured 
classes of meritorious candidates: M.R. Balaji 
(supra). It is not a case of merely providing an 
advantage or a concession or preference in 
favour of the backward classes and other 
disadvantaged groups. It is not even a 
handicap to disadvantage the forward classes 
so as to attain a measure of qualitative or 
relative equality between the two groups. 
Reservation which excludes from consideration 
all those persons falling outside the specially 
favoured groups, irrespective of merits and 
qualifications, is much more positive and 
drastic a discrimination - albeit to achieve the 
same end of qualitative equality - but unless 
strictly and narrowly tailored to a compelling 
constitutional mandate, it is unlikely to qualify 
as a benign discrimination. Unlike in the case 
of other affirmative action programmes, 
backwardness by itself is not sufficient to 
warrant reservation. What qualifies for 
reservation is backwardness which is the 
result of identified past discrimination and 
which is comparable to that of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes. Reservation 
is a remedial action specially addressed to the 
ill effects stemming from historical 
discrimination. To ignore this vital distinction 
between affirmative action short of reservation 
and reservation by a predetermined quota as a 
remedy for past inequities is to ignore the 
special characteristic of the constitutional 
grant of power specially addressed to the 
constitutionally recognised backwardness.
	xx			xx		xx
	319.  Reservation should be avoided except in 
extreme cases of acute backwardness resulting 
from prior discrimination as in the case of the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
and other classes of persons in comparable 
positions. In all other cases, preferential 
treatment short of reservation can be adopted. 
Any such action, though in some respects 
discriminatory, is permissible on the basis of a 
legitimate classification rationally related to 
the attainment of equality in all its aspects.

	Xx			xx			xx

323 (16). 	In the final analysis, poverty which 
is the ultimate result of inequities and which is 
the immediate cause and effect of 
backwardness has to be eradicated not merely 
by reservation as aforesaid, but by free medical 
aid, free elementary education, scholarships 
for higher education and other financial 
support, free housing, self- employment and 
settlement schemes, effective implementation 
of land reforms, strict and impartial operation 
of the law-enforcing machinery, 
industrialization, construction of roads, 
bridges, culverts, canals, markets, 
introduction of transport, free supply of water, 
electricity and other ameliorative measures 
particularly in areas densely populated by 
backward classes of citizens.
					(underlined for emphasis)


66.	Following observations in M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore 
(AIR 1963 SC 649) are also relevant: 
"In this connection, it is necessary to 
remember that the reservation made by the 
impugned order is in regard to admission in 
the seats of higher education in the State. It is 
well-known that as a result of the awakening 
caused by political freedom, all classes of 
citizens are showing a growing desire to give 
their children higher university education and 
so, the Universities are called upon to face the 
challenge of this growing demand. While it is 
necessary that the demand for higher 
education which is thus increasing from year 
to year must be adequately met and properly 
channelised, we cannot overlook the fact that 
in meeting that demand standards of higher 
education in Universities must not be lowered. 
The large demand for education may be met by 
starting larger number of educational 
institutions vocational schools and 
polytechnics. But it would be against the 
national interest to exclude from the portals of 
our Universities qualified and competent 
students on the ground that all the seats in 
the Universities are reserved for weaker 
elements in society. As has been observed by 
the University Education Commission, "he 
indeed must be blind who does not see that 
mighty as are the political changes, far deeper 
are the fundamental questions which will be 
decided by what happens in the universities" 
(p. 32). Therefore, in considering the question 
about the propriety of the reservation made by 
the impugned order, we cannot lose sight of 
the fact that the reservation is made in respect 
of higher university education. The demand for 
technicians, scientists, doctors, economists, 
engineers and experts for the further economic 
advancement of the country is so great that it 
would cause grave prejudice to national 
interests if considerations of merit are 
completely excluded by whole-sale reservation 
of seats in all Technical, Medical or 
Engineering colleges or institutions of that 
kind. Therefore, considerations of national 
interest and the interests of the community or 
society as a whole cannot be ignored in 
determining the question as to whether the 
special provision contemplated by Art. 15(4) 
can be special provision which excludes the 
rest of the society altogether. In this 
connection, it would be relevant to mention 
that the University Education Commission 
which considered the problem of the 
assistance to backward communities, had 
observed that the percentage of reservation 
shall not exceed a third of the total number of 
seats, and it has added that the principle of 
reservation may be adopted for a period of ten 
years. (p. 53). 
We have already noticed that the Central 
Government in its communication to the State 
has suggested that reservation for backward 
classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes may be up to 25% with marginal 
adjustments not exceeding 10% in exceptional 
cases. 
The learned Advocate-General has suggested 
that reservation of a large number of seats for 
the weaker sections of the society would not 
affect either the depth or efficiency of 
scholarship at all, and in support of this 
argument, he has relied on the observations 
made by the Backward Classes Commission 
that it found no complaint in the States of 
Madras, Andhra, Travancore-Cochin and 
Mysore where the system of recruiting 
candidates from other Backward Classes to the 
reserve quota has been in vogue for several 
decades. The Committee further observed that 
the representatives of the upper classes did 
not complain about any lack of efficiency in 
the offices recruited by reservation (p. 135). 
This opinion, however, is plainly inconsistent 
with what is bound to be the inevitable 
consequence of reservation in higher university 
education. If admission to professional and 
technical colleges is unduly liberalised it would 
be idle to contend that the quality of our 
graduates will not suffer. That is not to say 
that reservation should not be adopted; 
reservation should and must be adopted to 
advance the prospects of the weaker sections 
of society, but in providing for special 
measures in that behalf care should be taken 
not to exclude admission to higher educational 
centres to deserving and qualified candidates 
of other communities. A special provision 
contemplated by Art. 15(4) like reservation of 
posts and appointments contemplated by Art. 
16(4) must be within reasonable limits. The 
interests of weaker sections of society which 
are a first charge on the states and the Centres 
have to be adjusted with the interests of the 
community as a whole. The adjustment of 
these competing claims is undoubtedly a 
difficult matter, but if under the guise of 
making a special provision, a State reserves 
practically all the seats available in all the 
colleges, that clearly would be subverting the 
object of Art. 15(4). In this matter again, we 
are reluctant to say definitely what would be a 
proper provision to make. Speaking generally 
and in a broad way, a special provision should 
be less than 50%; how much less than 50% 
would depend upon the relevant prevailing 
circumstances in each case. In this particular 
case it is remarkable that when the State 
issued its order on July 10, 1961, it 
emphatically expressed its opinion that the 
reservation of 68% recommended by the Nagan 
Gowda Committee would not be in the larger 
interests of the State. What happened between 
July 10, 1961, and July 31, 1962, does not 
appear on the record. But the State changed 
its mind and adopted the recommendation of 
the Committee ignoring its earlier decision that 
the said recommendation was contrary to the 
larger interests of the State. In our opinion, 
when the State makes a special provision for 
the advancement of the weaker sections of 
society specified in Art. 15(4) it has to 
approach its task objectively and in a rational 
manner. Undoubtedly, it has to take 
reasonable and even generous steps to help 
the advancement of weaker elements; the 
extent of the problem must be weighted, the 
requirements of the community at large must 
be borne in mind and a formula must be 
evolved which would strike a reasonable 
balance between the several relevant 
considerations. Therefore, we are satisfied that 
the reservation of 68% directed by the 
impugned order is plainly inconsistent with 
Art. 15(4).
The petitioners contend that having 
regard to the infirmities in the impugned 
order, action of the State in issuing the said 
order amounts to a fraud on the Constitutional 
power conferred on the State by Art. 15(4). 
This argument is well-founded, and must be 
upheld. When it is said about an executive 
action that it is a fraud on the Constitution, it 
does not necessarily mean that the action is 
actuated by mala fides. An executive action 
which is patently and plainly outside the limits 
of the constitutional authority conferred on the 
State in that behalf is struck down as being 
ultra vires the State's authority. If, on the 
other hand, the executive action does not 
patently or overtly transgress the authority 
conferred on it by the Constitution, but the 
transgression is covert or latent, the said 
action is struck down as being a fraud on the 
relevant constitutional power. It is in this 
connection that courts often consider the 
substance of the matter and not its form and 
in ascertaining the substance of the matter, 
the appearance or the cloak, or the veil of the 
executive action is carefully scrutinized and if 
it appears that notwithstanding the 
appearance, the cloak or the veil of the 
executive action, in substance and in truth the 
constitutional power has been transgressed, 
the impugned action is struck down as a fraud 
on the Constitution. We have already noticed 
that the impugned order in the present case 
has categorised the Backward Classes on the 
sole basis of caste which, in our opinion, is not 
permitted by Art. 15(4); and we have also held 
that the reservation of 68% made by the 
impugned order is plainly inconsistent with 
the concept of the special provision authorised 
by Art. 15(4). Therefore, it follows that the 
impugned order is a fraud on the 
Constitutional power conferred on the State by 
Art. 15(4). The learned Advocate-General has 
made an earnest and strong plea before us 
that we should not strike down the order, but 
should strike down only such portions of the 
order which appear to us to be 
unconstitutional on the doctrine of 
severability. He has urged that since 1958, the 
State has had to make five orders to deal with 
the problem of advancing the lot of the 
Backward Classes and the State is anxious 
that the implementation of the impugned order 
should not be completely prohibited or 
stopped. We do not see how it would be 
possible to sever the invalid provisions of the 
impugned order. If the categorisation of the 
Backward Classes is invalid, this Court cannot 
and would not attempt the task of 
enumerating the said categories; and if the 
percentage of reservation is improper and 
outside Art. 15(4), this Court would not 
attempt to lay down definitely and in an 
inflexible manner as to what would be the 
proper percentage to reserve. In this 
connection, it may be relevant to refer to one 
fact on which the petitioners have strongly 
relied. It is urged for them that the method 
adopted by the Government of Maharashtra in 
exercising its power under Art. 15(4) is a 
proper method to adopt. It appears that the 
Maharashtra Government has decided to 
afford financial assistance, and make 
monetary grants to students seeking higher 
education where it is shown that the annual 
income of their families is below a prescribed 
minimum. The said scheme is not before us 
and we are not called upon to express any 
opinion on it. However, we may observe that if 
any State adopts such a measure, it may 
afford relief to and assist the advancement of 
the Backward Classes in the State, because 
backwardness, social and educational, is 
ultimately and primarily due to poverty. An 
attempt can also be made to start newer and 
more educational institutions, polytechnics, 
vocational institutions and even rural 
Universities and thereby create more 
opportunities for higher education. This dual 
attack on the problem posed by the weakness 
of backward communities can claim to proceed 
on a rational, broad and scientific approach 
which is consistent with, and true to, the noble 
ideal of a secular welfare democratic State set 
up by the Constitution of this country. Such 
an approach can be supplemented, if 
necessary by providing special provision by 
way of reservation to aid the Backward classes 
and Scheduled castes and Tribes. It may well 
be that there may be other ways and means of 
achieving the same result. In our country 
where social and economic conditions differ 
from State to State, it would be idle to expect 
absolute uniformity of approach; but in taking 
executive action to implement the policy of Art. 
15(4), it is necessary for the States to 
remember that the policy which is intended to 
be implemented is the policy which has been 
declared by Art. 46 and the preamble of the 
Constitution. It is for the attainment of social 
and economic justice Art. 15(4) authorises the 
making of special provisions for the 
advancement of the communities there 
contemplated even if such provisions may be 
inconsistent with the fundamental rights 
guaranteed under Art. 15 or 29(2). The 
context, therefore, requires that the executive 
action taken by the State must be based on an 
objective approach, free from all extraneous 
pressures. The said action is intended to do 
social and economic justice and must be taken 
in a manner that justice is and should be 
done. 
Whilst we are dealing with this question, 
it would be relevant to add to that the 
provisions of Art. 15(4) are similar to those of 
Art. 16(4) which fell to be considered in the 
case of The General Manager, Southern 
Railway v. Rangachari (1962 (2) SCR 586). In 
that case, the majority decision of this Court 
held that the power of reservation which is 
conferred on the State under Art. 16(4) can be 
exercised by the State in a proper case not 
only by providing for reservation of 
appointments, but also by providing for 
reservation of selection posts. This conclusion 
was reached on the basis that it served to give 
effect to the intention of the Constitution 
makers to make adequate safeguards for the 
advancement of Backward Classes and to 
secure their adequate representation in the 
Services. The judgment shows that the only 
point which was raised for the decision of this 
Court in that case was whether the reservation 
made was outside Art. 16(4) and that posed 
the bare question about the construction of 
Art. 16(4). The propriety, the reasonableness or 
the wisdom of the impugned order was not 
questioned because it was not the 
respondent's case that if the order was 
justified under Art. 16(4), it was a fraud on the 
Constitution. Even so, it was pointed out in 
the judgment that the efficiency of 
administration is of such a paramount 
importance that it would be unwise and 
impermissible to make any reservation at the 
cost of efficiency of administration; that, it was 
stated, was undoubtedly the effect of Art. 335. 
Therefore, what is true in regard to Art. 15(4) 
is equally true in regard to Art. 16(4). There 
can be no doubt that the Constitution-makers 
assumed, as they were entitled to, that while 
making adequate reservation under Art. 16(4), 
care would be taken not to provide for 
unreasonable, excessive or extravagant 
reservation, for that would, by eliminating 
general competition in a large field and by 
creating wide-spread dissatisfaction amongst 
the employees, materially affect efficiency. 
Therefore, like the special provision improperly 
made under Art. 15(4), reservation made under 
Art. 16(4) beyond the permissible and 
legitimate limits would be liable to be 
challenged as a fraud on the Constitution. In 
this connection it is necessary to emphasize 
that Art.  15(4)  is an enabling provision; it 
does not impose an obligation, but merely 
leaves it to the discretion of the appropriate 
government to take suitable action, if 
necessary." 

67.	To similar effect is the view expressed in K.C. Vasanth  
Kumar's  case (supra) at para 150:  
"At this stage it should be made clear that if on 
a fresh determination some castes or 
communities have to go out of the list of 
backward classes prepared for Article 15(4) 
and Article 16(4) the Government may still 
pursue the policy of amelioration of weaker 
sections of the population amongst them in 
accordance with the directive principle 
contained in article 46 of the Constitution.  
There are in all castes and communities poor 
people who if they are given adequate 
opportunity and training may be able to 
compete successfully with persons belonging 
to richer classes. The Government may provide 
for them liberal grants of scholarships, free 
studentship, free boarding and lodging 
facilities, free uniforms, free mid day meals etc. 
to make the life of poor students comfortable.  
The Government may also provide extra 
tutorial facilities, stationery and books free of 
costs and library facilities.  These and other 
steps should be taken in the lower classes so 
that by the time a student appears for the 
qualifying examination he may be able to 
attain a high degree of proficiency in his 
studies."
It has also been noted as follows:
"I wish to add that the doctrine of protective 
discrimination embodied in Article 15(4) and 
16(4) and the mandate of Article 29(2) cannot 
be stretched beyond a particular limit.  The 
State exists to serve its people.  There are 
some services where expertise and skill are of 
the essence.   For example, a hospital run by 
the State serves the ailing members of the 
public who need medical aid.  Medical services 
directly affect and deal with the health and life 
of the populace.  Profession expertise, born of 
knowledge and experience, of a high degree of 
technical knowledge and operation skill is 
required of pilots and aviation engineers.  The 
lives of citizens depend on such persons.   
There are other similar fields of governmental 
activity where professional, technological, 
scientific or other special skill is called for.  In 
such services or posts under the Union or 
State, we think where can be no room for 
reservation of posts; merit alone must be the 
sole and decisive consideration for 
appointments."
			(underlined for emphasis)

68.	Lengthy arguments have been advanced as to the 
seriousness in identifying the backward classes. On the basis 
of Indra Sawhney No.1's judgment, the Government of  India 
issued orders in respect of reservations of appointments or on 
posts under the Government of India in favour of backward 
classes of citizens. It was the subject matter of challenge in 
Indra Sawhney  No.1. In its judgment dated 16.11.1992 this 
Court directed the Government to constitute a permanent 
body by 15.3.1993 for entertaining and examining and 
recommending upon requests made for inclusion or 
complaints of over inclusion and under inclusion in the lists of 
backward classes of citizens. 

69.	Constituent Assembly Debates 1951 have also relevance 
for adjudicating the controversy. The following portion needs 
to be extracted: 

70.	Parliamentary Standing Committee Report at paras 36, 
37 and 46 read as follows:

"36.	The committee notes that there is a major 
limitation on data about the social economic 
and educational profile of our population in 
general and about OBCs in particular.  The 
last caste-based census in India was done in 
1931.  Accordingly there are no periodic data 
available on the demographic spread of OBCs 
and their access to amenities.  Even the 
Mandal Commission had used the 1931 
Census data.  Whatever limited data are 
available, pertain to surveys conducted by 
NSSO from 1998-99 onwards, which are only 
'sample surveys'.

37.	The Committee found that there exists no 
accepted mechanism/criteria to group the 
people into different categories.  As a result, 
existing list of backward castes/communities 
are termed in some cases, as inaccurate.  
Besides, any regular process of review is also 
not in place.  Such a review implies both 
'inclusion' and 'exclusion'.  The Committee, 
therefore, emphasizes the need for taking urgent 
measures/steps for identifying and removing all 
such lacunae and removing all such lacunae 
and problems by putting in place scientific and 
objective mechanism/benchmarks for this 
purpose.

		xx		xx			xx

46.  There have been suggestions/counter-
suggestions on the issue of exclusion of the 
'creamy layer amongst OBCs in the proposed 
legislation. On the one hand, it was argued 
that the concept of creamy layer did not apply 
in the case of reservation in admission. It was 
pointed out that the debate on the exclusion of 
the creamy layer was misplaced as the 
Supreme Court's observation regarding the 
exclusion of the creamy layer within the SCs 
and STs from the purview of reservation was 
only for public employment and promotion. 
The other view in this regard was that the 
inclusion of the creamy layer in reservation 
would defeat the very purpose of providing 
reservation to the backward classes. It was 
also stated that the exclusion of the creamy 
layer  would ensure that the intended benefits 
of the reservation reach to the really deserving 
among the backward classes.  It was further 
stated that this in itself would not suffice and 
should be supplemented by categorization of 
the backward classes in various groups 
depending upon their degree of  backwardness
and apportioning of appropriate percentage of 
reservation to each group. It was also brought 
to the committee that similar experiments  in 
States of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka,
Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra etc. have, in fact, 
stood the test of time and yielded the desired 
results."

71.	One of the petitioners "Youth for Equality" had filed a 
representation before the Parliamentary Committee giving 
certain important data. Relevant portions read as follows: 

	"TOP WITHOUT BASE

The condition of infrastructure and staff 
at the primary and secondary level is of some 
concern and the government - especially the 
Ministry for Human Resource and 
Development which has proposed increased 
reservations, should work towards 
improvement in this area for "Real" affirmative 
action. According to the National Institute of 
Educational Planning and Administration (in 
2003) the state of affairs at the primary level 
was as under:-
(i)	In 62 996 schools in country do not have 
school building and are operating in tents or under 
the trees.

(ii)	In 70,739 Primary Schools - No class room.

(iii)	In 95,003 primary Schools -  Single Class 
room.

(iv)	 In 8,269 Primary Schools  No teacher

(v)	In 1,15,267 Primary schools -Single teacher

(vi)	In more than 60,000 schools the pupil : 
Teacher ratio is greater than 100 :1 while the 
acceptable ratio is  less than 40:1.

(vii)	In 84,848 schools  No black board

(viii)	In More than 1 00 000 Schools - No electricity.

Apart from the above, according to the NCERT 
(In 1998), Only 34.6% of Govt. Schools had 
safe Drinking water, 13.2% had urinal and 
4.9% had urinals  for girls and only  6.0% had 
a lavatory. While the government promises a 
spending of about 6% of GDP for the 
development of education, the reality has been 
to the contrary. The Government spending in 
the years was as under:
2000-2001	4.1%
 2001-2002	4.3% 
2002-2004 	3.8% 
2004-2005	3.5%

72.	The National Commission for Backward Classes Act, 
1993 (in short 'Backward Classes Act') was accordingly 
enacted. Few provisions of this Act need to be noted.

73.	Section 2 (c) defines lists as follows:
"Lists means lists prepared by the Government 
of India from time to time for purposes of 
making provisions for the reservation of 
appointments or posts in favour of backward 
classes of citizens which, in the opinion of that 
Government, are not adequately represented in 
the services under the Government of India 
and any local or other authority within the 
territory of India or under the control of the 
Government of India".

74.	Important provisions are Sections 9 and 10 which read 
as follows:
"9. Functions of the Commission (1) 
The Commission shall examine requests 
for inclusion of any class of citizens as a 
backward class in such lists and hear 
complaints of over-inclusion or under 
inclusion of any backward class in such 
lists and tender such advice to the 
Central Government as it deems 
appropriate.

(2)	The advice of the Commission shall 
ordinarily be binding upon the Central 
Government.

10.	Powers of the Commission- The 
Commission shall, while performing its 
functions under sub-section (1) of Section 
9, have all the powers of a civil court 
trying a suit and in particular, in respect 
of the following matters, namely:-

(a)	summoning and enforcing the 
attendance of any person from any part 
of India and examining him on oath;

(b)	requiring the discovery and 
production of any document;

(c)	receiving evidence on affidavits;

(d)	requisitioning any public record or 
copy thereof from any court of office;

(e)	issuing commissions for the 
examination of witnesses and documents; 
and

(f)	any other matter which may be 
prescribed."

75.	A periodic revision of the lists by the Central Government 
is a statutory mandate. Petitioners have highlighted that there 
is no exclusion and on the other hand there has been 
inclusion.  On the question of castes enumeration it is 
emphasized that 1931 Census was not the basis for 
identification of other backward classes. In fact the central 
OBC List is not drawn up on the basis of 1931 Census. Each 
State has different modalities for identification. Only for the 
purpose of quantum the population provides a foundation.  

76.	It needs no emphasis that if ultimately and indisputably 
the constitutional goal is the casteless and classless society,  
there has to be more effective implementation of the Backward 
Classes Act. The exercise required to be undertaken under 
Section 11 of the said Act is not intended to be a routine 
exercise and also not an exercise in futility.  It has to be not 
only effective but also result oriented. The petitioners have 
highlighted the lack of seriousness of the Government in 
carrying out the exercise. Voluminous datas have been 
brought on record in this regard. With reference to the reports 
of the Commission, learned counsel for the respondents on the 
other hand have stressed on the fact that the Commission has 
been working with all sincerity and with the object of 
effectively implementing the Backward Classes Act.   One 
thing needs to be noted here. Concrete data about the number 
of backward classes in the country does not appear to be 
available. The survey conducted by the National Sample 
Survey reveals that the percentage is not 52% as is highlighted 
by the respondents. 

77.	Section 2(g) of the Act is relevant in this regard. It reads 
as follows: 
 "Other Backward Classes" means the class or 
classes of citizens who are socially and 
educationally backward, and are so 
determined by the Central Government."

78.	At this juncture, it is to be noted that the Backward 
Classes Act in order to be wholly functional mandates 
determination by the Central Government of the backward 
classes for whom the Statute is intended. Undisputedly, such 
determination has not been done. The plea is that for more 
than half a century enough attention has not been given for 
the benefit of the other backward classes in the matter of 
admissions to higher educational institutions.  That cannot be 
a ground to act with hurry and with un-determined datas. It 
may be as rightly contended by learned counsel for the 
respondents that the percentage can certainly be not less than 
27%. But that is no answer to the important question as to the 
identity test. In the background loom the socially and 
economically backward class of citizens. Poverty knows no 
caste. Poor has no caste. It is an unfortunate class.  It is a 
matter of common knowledge that the institution of caste is a 
peculiarity of Indian institution when there is considerable 
controversy amongst the scholars as to how the caste system 
originated in this country. Originally, there were four main 
castes known as Varnas . But gradually castes and sub-castes 
multiplied as the social fabric expanded with the absorption of 
different groups of people who belong to various cults and 
professing different religious faiths. The caste system in its 
earlier stage was quite elastic but in course of time it gradually 
hardened into a rigid framework based upon heredity. The 
inevitable result was social inequality. At some point of time 
occupation was the background for determination of castes. 
May be, at some point of time it depended on the income of the 
individual. But it appears to have taken disastrous turn with 
difference of status of various castes. But passage of time 
shows that the occupational label has lost much of its 
significance.  But at the same time, the poor and down 
trodden who belong to the caste of their own were the 
founders of poor.  In Indra Sawhney  No.1 this factor was 
noticed.  

79.	It is said that one must take life in ones stride, let today 
embrace the past with remembrance and the future with 
longing.

80.	Don't look for the path far away, the path exists under 
your feet.

81.	What is past and what cannot be prevented should not 
be grieved for. 

82.	With reference to the Office Memorandum which provides 
for preference in favour of "poorer sections" over other 
members of the backward classes, the expression was held to 
be relatable to those who are socially and economically more 
backward. The use of the word 'poorer' in the context was held 
to be a measure of the social backwardness.  It is therefore 
unmistakenly recognized that economic backwardness is a 
factor which can never be lost sight of. There are only two 
families in the world; the haves and the have nots said Miquel 
De Cervantes Don Qutxote de ta Mancha. Tolstoy has 
emphatically said "We will do anything for the poor man 
anything but get of his back" (quoted in Huntington 
Philanthrophy and Morality). 

83.	William Cobbett had said "to be poor and independent is 
very nearly an impossibility. (See His book 'Advise to Young 
Men'). We cannot turn Nelson's eye to the poor, those covered 
by all encompassing expression "economically backward 
classes". 

84.	Should this class of people be kept out of the mainstream 
of governmental priorities and policies because they belong to 
a particular caste? As noted above, the poor have no caste. A 
person belonging to a higher caste should not be made to 
suffer for what his forefathers had done several  generations 
back.  

85.	Franklin D Roosevelt in a speech in 1940 had said "It is 
an unfortunate human failing that a full pocket book often 
groans  more loudly than an empty stomach".  The haves and 
the have nots have to co-exist.  If the creamy layer has to be 
excluded the economically backward classes have to be 
included. That would be social balancing and that would be 
giving true meaning of the objectives of the Constitution. 
Social empowerment cannot be and is certainly not a measure 
for only socially and educationally backward classes. It also 
has to be for the socially and economically backward classes.  
Unless this balance, which is very delicate, is maintained the 
system inevitably will develop a crack and this crack may after 
a certain point of time be difficult to be joined. Instead of 
lightening the society from castes or classes it will be over 
burdened and a point of time may come when we shall not be 
able to bear the burden any further. Timely steps in this 
regard will save the Indian society and democracy from a 
catastrophe of collapse because of something which the 
Constitution wants to obliterate. 

86.	On the question of time period for the reservation, it is 
submitted  that length of the leap to be provided depends 
upon the gap to be filled. It is fairly accepted by learned 
counsel for the respondents that as and when castes reach a    
higher level it is to be excluded from the zone of consideration. 
It is further submitted that traditional occupation is being 
pursued by persons belonging to some castes and the system 
still subsists and has not broken down. In the absence of 
alternative occupation which may not be lucrative, the persons 
who used to previously carry on the traditional occupation find 
it difficult to take up any other occupation.

87.	It has been averred that consequent to several efforts, 
India has made enormous progress in terms of increase in 
institutions, teachers and students in elementary education. 
But despite all the efforts large population of the children in 
the country still remain out of school.

88.	One of the contentions is that by passage of time 
prolonged reservation becomes illicit. In Motor General Traders 
and Anr. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and Ors. (1984 (1) SCC 
222)  following observations were made: 
"16. What may be unobjectionable as a 
transitional or temporary measure at an initial 
stage can still become discriminatory and 
hence violative of Article 14 of the Constitution 
if it is persisted in over a long period without 
any justification. The trend of decisions of this 
Court on the above question may be traced 
thus. In Bhaiyalal Shukla v. State of Madhya 
Pradesh [1962] Supp. 2 S.C.R. 257 one of the 
contentions urged was that the levy of sales 
tax in the area which was formerly known as 
Vindhya Pradesh (a Part 'C' State) on building 
materials used in a works contract was 
discriminatory after the merger of that area in 
the new State of Madhya Pradesh which was 
formed on November 1,1956 under the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956 as the sale of 
building materials in a works contract was not 
subject to any levy of sales tax in another part 
of the same new State namely the area which 
was formerly part of the area known as State 
of Madhya Pradesh (the Central Provinces and 
Berar area). That contention was rejected by 
this Court with the following observations at 
pages 274-275 :
The laws in different portions of the new 
State of Madhya Pradesh were enacted 
by different Legislatures, and under 
Section 119 of the States Reorganisation 
Act all laws inforce are to continue until 
repealed or altered by the appropriate 
Legislature. We have already held that 
the sales tax law in Vindhya Pradesh 
was validly enacted, and it brought its 
validity with it under Section 119 of the 
States Reorganisation Act, when it 
became a part of the State of Madhya 
Pradesh. Thereafter, the different laws 
in different parts of Madhya Pradesh 
can be sustained on the ground that the 
differentiation arises from historical 
reasons, and a geographical 
classification based on historical 
reasons has been upheld by this Court 
in M.K. Prithi Rajji v. The State of 
Rajasthan (Civil Appeal No. 327 of 1956 
decided on November 2, 1960) and 
again in The State of Madhya Pradesh v. 
The Gwalior Sugar Co. Ltd. (Civil 
Appeals Nos. 98 and 99 of 1957 decided 
on November 30, 1960). The latter case 
is important, because the sugarcane 
cess levied in the former Gwalior State 
but not in the rest of Madhya Bharat of 
which it formed a part, was challenged 
on the same ground as here, but was 
upheld as not affected by Article14. We, 
therefore, reject this argument.

89.	In N.M. Thomas's case (supra) the parameters of various 
clauses of Article 16 were highlighted as follows: 
"37. The rule of equality within Articles 14 and 
16(1) will not be violated by a rule which will 
ensure equality of representation in the 
services for unrepresented classes after 
satisfying the basic needs of efficiency of 
administration. Article 16(2) rules out some 
basis of classification including race, caste, 
descent, place of birth etc. Article 16(4) 
clarifies and explains that classification on the 
basis of backwardness does not fall within 
Article 16(2) and is legitimate for the purposes 
of Article 16(1).  If preference shall be given to 
a particular under-represented community 
other than a backward class or under-
represented State in an All India Service such 
a rule will contravene Article 16(2). A similar 
rule giving preference to an under-represented 
backward community is valid and will not 
contravene Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2). Article 
16(4) removes any doubt in this respect.
	xx 			xx			xx
44. Our Constitution aims at equality of status 
and opportunity for all citizens including those 
who are socially, economically and 
educationally backward. The claims of 
members of backward classes require 
adequate representation in legislative and 
executive bodies. If members of Scheduled 
Castes and Tribes, who are said by this Court 
to be backward classes, can maintain 
minimum necessary requirement of 
administrative efficiency, not only 
representation but also preference may be 
given to them to enforce equality and to 
eliminate inequality. Articles 15(4) and 16(4) 
bring out the position of backward classes to 
merit equality. Special provisions are made for 
the advancement of backward classes and 
reservations of appointments and posts for 
them to secure adequate representation. These 
provisions will bring out the content of equality 
guaranteed by Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1). The 
basic concept of equality is equality of 
opportunity for appointment. Preferential 
treatment for members of backward classes 
with due regard to administrative efficiency 
alone can mean equality of opportunity for all 
citizens. Equality under Article 16 could not 
have a different content from equality under 
Article 14. Equality of opportunity for 
unequals can only mean aggravation of 
inequality. Equality of opportunity admits 
discrimination with reason and prohibits 
discrimination without reason. Discrimination 
with reasons means rational classification for 
differential treatment having nexus to the 
Constitutionally permissible object. 
Preferential representation for the backward 
classes in services with due regard to 
administrative efficiency is permissible object 
and backward classes are a rational 
classification recognised by our Constitution. 
Therefore, differential treatment in standards 
of selection is within the concept of equality.
	xx			xx			xx
56.	If we are all to be treated in the same 
manner, this must carry with it the important 
requirement that none of us should be better 
or worse in upbringing, education, than any 
one else which is an unattainable ideal for 
human beings of anything like the sort we now 
see. Some people maintain that the concept of 
equality of opportunity is an unsatisfactory 
concept For, a complete formulation of it 
renders it incompatible with any form of 
human society. Take for instance, the case of 
equality of opportunity for education. This 
equality cannot start in schools and hence 
requires uniform treatment in families which is 
an evident impossibility. To remedy this, all 
children might be brought up in state 
nurseries, but, to achieve the purpose, the 
nurseries would have to be run on vigorously 
uniform lines. Could we guarantee equality of 
opportunity to the young even in those 
circumstances? The idea is well expressed by 
Laski:
'Equality means, in the second place, that 
adequate opportunities are laid open to 
all. By adequate opportunities we cannot 
imply equal opportunities in a sense that 
implies identity of original chance. The 
native endowments of men are by no 
means equal. Children who are brought 
up in an atmosphere where things of the 
mind are accounted highly are bound to 
start the race of life with advantages no 
legislation can secure. Parental character 
will inevitably affect profoundly the 
equality of the children whom it touches. 
So long, therefore, as the family endures - 
and there seems little reason to anticipate 
or to desire its disappearance - the 
varying environments it will create make 
the notion of equal opportunities a 
fantastic one'.

xx			xx			xx

60. Bernard A.O. Williams, in his article 'The 
Idea of Equality" (supra) gives an illustration of 
the working of the principle of equality of 
opportunity:
'Suppose that in a certain society great 
prestige is attached to membership of a 
warrior class, the duties of which require 
great physical strength. This class has in 
the past been recruited from certain 
wealthy families only, but egalitarian 
reformers achieve a change in the rules, 
by which warriors are recruited from all 
sections of the society, on the result of a 
suitable competition. The effect of this, 
however, is that the wealthy families still 
provide virtually all the warriors, because 
the rest of the populace is so 
undernourished by reason of poverty that 
their physical strength is inferior to that 
of the wealthy and well nourished. The 
reformers protest that equality of 
opportunity has not really been achieved; 
the wealthy reply that in fact it has, and 
that the poor now have the opportunity of 
becoming warriors - it is just bad luck 
that their characteristics are such that 
they do not pass the test- "We are not", 
they might say, "excluding anyone for 
being poor; we exclude people for being 
weak, and it is unfortunate that those 
who are poor are also weak'.

xx			xx			xx
67. Today, the political theory which 
acknowledges the obligation of government 
under Part IV of the Constitution to provide 
jobs, medical care, old age pension, etc., 
extends to human rights and imposes an 
affirmative obligation to promote equality and 
liberty. The force of the idea of a state with 
obligation to help the weaker sections of its 
members seems to have increasing influence in 
Constitutional law. The idea finds expression 
in a number of cases in America involving 
social  discrimination and also in the decisions 
requiring the state to offset the effects of 
poverty by providing counsel, transcript of 
appeal, expert witnesses, etc. Today, the sense 
that government has affirmative responsibility 
for elimination of inequalities, social, economic 
or otherwise, is one of the dominant forces in 
Constitutional law. While special concessions 
for the under-privileged have been easily 
permitted, they have not traditionally been 
required. Decisions in the areas of criminal 
procedure, voting rights and education in 
America suggest that the traditional approach 
may not be completely adequate. In these 
areas, the inquiry whether equality has been 
achieved no longer ends with numerical 
equality; rather the equality clause has been 
held to require resort to a standard of 
proportional equality which requires the state, 
in framing legislation, to take into account the 
private inequalities of wealth, of education and 
other circumstances.
		xx			xx		xx
89. The ultimate reason for the demand of 
equality for the members of backward classes 
is a moral perspective which affirms the 
intrinsic value of all human beings and calls 
for a society which provides these conditions of 
life which men need for development of their 
varying capacities. It is an assertion of human 
equality in the sense that it manifests an equal 
concern for the well being of all men. On the 
one hand it involves a demand for the removal 
of those obstacles and impediments which 
stand in the way of the development of human 
capacities, that is, it is a call for the abolition 
of unjustifiable inequalities. On the other 
hand, the demand itself gets its sense and 
moral driving force from the recognition that 
"the poorest he that is in England hath a life to 
live, as the greatest he".

90.	`Equality' and `excellence' are two conflicting claims 
difficult to be reconciled. The Constitution, in order to ensure 
true equality provides for special treatment to socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens which is obviously 
desirable for providing social justice, though at the cost of 
merit. However, the Constitution does not provide at all for 
'institutional reservation.' Therefore, it's constitutionality is to 
be judged on the touchstone of Article 14. A large number of 
cases cropped up in this area concerning the institutional 
preference for admission into postgraduate medical education 
and super specialties. The judiciary came forward and laid 
down detailed principles covering the need of such preference 
and to limit the extent of such reservation in view of the 
importance of merit in the context of national interest and 
international importance of universal excellence in super 
specialties. 

91.	It is to be noted that the foundation for fixing 27% 
appears to be the view that 52% of the population belong to 
OBC. There is no supportable data for this proposition. In fact,  
different Commissions at different points of time have different 
figures. It is the stand of the respondents that no Commission 
has fixed the percentage below 52% and, therefore,  there is 
nothing wrong in fixing the percentage at 27%. This is not the 
correct approach.   It may be that in no case the percentage of 
persons belonging to OBC is less than 27% but supposing in a 
given case considering the fact that the actual percentage is 
40% a figure less than 27% should have been fixed. The 
Commission set out pursuant to the directions of this Court 
seems to have somewhat acted on the petitions filed by the 
people claiming exclusion or inclusion. That was not the real 
purpose of this Court's decision to direct appointment of 
Commission. The very purpose was to identify the classes. 
This was the exercise which was to be undertaken apart from 
considering the applications for inclusion or exclusion as the 
case may be. As has been conceded at the beginning of the 
case affirmative action is not under challenge.  Affirmative 
action is nothing but a crucial component of social justice in 
the constitutional dispensation but at the same time it has to 
be kept in view that the same does not infringe the principles 
of equality of which it is a part and/or unreasonably restraint 
or restrict other fundamental freedoms and that it does not                                                                                                                                                                   
violate the basic structure of the Constitution. 

92.	It needs no emphasis  that Articles 15(4), 15(5) and 16(4) 
have to comply with the requirements of Article 14 and the 
discipline imposed in several other provisions like Articles  
15(4)(a) and 15(4)(b), though, they form a part of the equality 
concept,   each of which  is so found in our Constitution.   

93.	It is a well settled principle in law that the Court cannot 
read anything into a statutory provision which is plain and 
unambiguous. A statute is an edict of the Legislature. The 
language employed in a statute is the determinative factor of 
legislative intent. 

94.	Words and phrases are symbols that stimulate mental 
references to referents. The object of interpreting a statute is 
to ascertain the intention of the Legislature enacting it. (See 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. M/s Price 
Waterhouse and Anr.  (AIR 1998 SC 74). The intention of the 
Legislature is primarily to be gathered from the language used, 
which means that attention should be paid to what has been 
said as also to what has not been said. As a consequence, a 
construction which requires for its support, addition or 
substitution of words or which results in rejection of words as 
meaningless has to be avoided. As observed in Crawford v. 
Spooner (1846 (6) Moore PC 1 ), Courts, cannot aid the 
Legislatures' defective phrasing of an Act, we cannot add or 
mend, and by construction make up deficiencies which are left 
there. (See The State of Gujarat and Ors. v. Dilipbhai 
Nathjibhai Patel and Anr. (JT 1998 (2) SC 253).  It is contrary 
to all rules of construction to read words into an Act unless it 
is absolutely necessary to do so. (See Stock v. Frank Jones 
(Tiptan) Ltd. (1978 1 All ER 948 (HL). Rules of interpretation 
do not permit Courts to do so, unless the provision as it 
stands is meaningless or of doubtful meaning. Courts are not 
entitled to read words into an Act of Parliament unless clear 
reason for it is to be found within the four corners of the Act 
itself. (Per Lord Loreburn L.C. in Vickers Sons and Maxim Ltd. 
v. Evans (1910) AC 445 (HL), quoted in Jamma Masjid, 
Mercara v. Kodimaniandra Deviah and Ors.(AIR 1962 SC 847).

95.	The question is not what may be supposed and has been 
intended but what has been said. "Statutes should be 
construed not as theorems of Euclid". Judge Learned Hand 
said, "but words must be construed with some imagination of 
the purposes which lie behind them". (See Lenigh Valley Coal 
Co. v. Yensavage 218 FR 547). The view was re-iterated in 
Union of India and Ors. v. Filip Tiago De Gama of Vedem 
Vasco De Gama (AIR 1990 SC 981). 

96.	In D.R. Venkatchalam and Ors. etc. v. Dy. Transport 
Commissioner and Ors. etc. (AIR 1977 SC 842), it was 
observed that Courts must avoid the danger of a priori 
determination of the meaning of a provision based on their 
own pre-conceived notions of ideological structure or scheme 
into which the provision to be interpreted is somewhat fitted. 
They are not entitled to usurp legislative function under the 
disguise of interpretation. 

97.	While interpreting a provision the Court only interprets 
the law and cannot legislate it. If a provision of law is misused 
and subjected to the abuse of process of law, it is for the 
legislature to amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary. 
(See Commissioner of Sales Tax, M.P. v. Popular Trading 
Company, Ujjain (2000 (5) SCC 511). The legislative casus 
omissus cannot be supplied by judicial interpretative process. 

98.	Two principles of construction  one relating to casus 
omissus and the other in regard to reading the statute as a 
whole  appear to be well settled. Under the first principle a 
casus omissus cannot be supplied by the Court except in the 
case of clear necessity and when reason for it is found in the 
four corners of the statute itself but at the same time a casus 
omissus should not be readily inferred and for that purpose all 
the parts of a statute or section must be construed together 
and every clause of a section should be construed with 
reference to the context and other clauses thereof so that the 
construction to be put on a particular provision makes a 
consistent enactment of the whole statute. This would be more 
so if literal construction of a particular clause leads to 
manifestly absurd or anomalous results which could not have 
been intended by the Legislature. "An intention to produce an 
unreasonable result", said Danackwerts, L.J. in Artemiou v. 
Procopiou (1966 1 QB 878), "is not to be imputed to a statute 
if there is some other construction available". Where to apply 
words literally would "defeat the obvious intention of the 
legislature and produce a wholly unreasonable result" we 
must "do some violence to the words" and so achieve that 
obvious intention and produce a rational construction. (Per 
Lord Reid in Luke v. IRC (1963 AC 557) where at p. 577 he 
also observed: "this is not a new problem, though our 
standard of drafting is such that it rarely emerges". 

99.	It is then true that, "when the words of a law extend not 
to an inconvenience rarely happening, but due to those which 
often happen, it is good reason not to strain the words further 
than they reach, by saying it is casus omissus, and that the 
law intended quae frequentius accidunt." "But," on the other 
hand, "it is no reason, when the words of a law do enough 
extend to an inconvenience seldom happening, that they 
should not extend to it as well as if it happened more 
frequently, because it happens but seldom" (See Fenton v. 
Hampton (1858) XI Moore, P.C. 347). A casus omissus ought 
not to be created by interpretation, save in some case of strong 
necessity. Where, however, a casus omissus does really occur, 
either through the inadvertence of the legislature, or on the 
principle quod semel aut bis existit praeterunt legislatores 
(legislators says pass over that which happens only once or 
twice), the rule is that the particular case, thus left unprovided 
for, must be disposed of according to the law as it existed 
before such statute - Casus omissus et oblivioni datus 
dispositioni communis juris relinquitur; "a casus omissus," 
observed Buller, J. in Jones v. Smart (1 T.R. 52), "can in no 
case be supplied by a court of law, for that would be to make 
laws."

100.	The golden rule for construing wills, statutes, and, in 
fact, all written instruments has been thus stated: "The 
grammatical and ordinary sense of the words is to be adhered 
to unless that would lead to some absurdity or some 
repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the instrument, 
in which case the grammatical and ordinary sense of the 
words may be modified, so as to avoid that absurdity and 
inconsistency, but no further" (See Grey v. Pearson (1857 (6) 
H.L. Cas. 61). The latter part of this "golden rule" must, 
however, be applied with much caution. "if," remarked Jervis, 
C.J., "the precise words used are plain and unambiguous in 
our judgment, we are bound to construe them in their 
ordinary sense, even though it lead, in our view of the case, to 
an absurdity or manifest injustice. Words may be modified or 
varied where their import is doubtful or obscure. But we 
assume the functions of legislators when we depart from the 
ordinary meaning of the precise words used, merely because 
we see, or fancy we see, an absurdity or manifest injustice 
from an adherence to their literal meaning" (See Abley v. Dale 
11, C.B. 378). 

101.	Classifications on the basis of castes in the long run has 
tendency of inherently becoming pernicious.  Therefore, the 
test of reasonableness has to apply. When the object is 
elimination of castes and not perpetuation  to achieve the goal 
of casteless society and a society free from discrimination of 
castes judicial review within the permissible limits is not ruled 
out.  But at the same time compelling State interest can be 
considered while assessing backwardness. The impact of 
poverty on backwardness cannot be lost sight of. Economic 
liberation and freedom are also important. In Nagaraj's case 
(supra) it was inter alia observed as follows:
"44. The above three concepts are 
independent variable concepts. The application 
of these concepts in public employment 
depends upon quantifiable data in each case. 
Equality in law is different from equality in 
fact. When we construe Article 16(4), it is 
equality in fact which plays the dominant role. 
Backward Classes seek justice. General class 
in public employment seeks equity. The 
difficulty comes in when the third variable 
comes in, namely, efficiency in service. In the 
issue of reservation, we are being asked to find 
a stable equilibrium between justice to the 
backwards, equity for the forwards and 
efficiency for the entire system. Equity and 
justice in the above context are hard concepts. 
However, if you add efficiency to equity and 
justice, the problem arises in the context of the 
reservation. This problem has to be examined, 
therefore, on the facts of each case. Therefore, 
Article 16(4) has to be construed in the light of 
Article 335 of the Constitution. Inadequacy in 
representation and backwardness of the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are 
circumstances which enable the State 
Government to act under Article 16(4) of the 
Constitution. However, as held by this Court 
the limitations on the discretion of the 
Government in the matter of reservation under 
Article 16(4) as well as Article 16(4-A) come in 
the form of Article 335 of the Constitution.  
	xx			xx			xx
46. The point which we are emphasising is 
that ultimately the present controversy is 
regarding the exercise of the power by the 
State Government depending upon the fact 
situation in each case. Therefore, "vesting of 
the power" by an enabling provision may be 
constitutionally valid and yet "exercise of the 
power" by the State in a given case may be 
arbitrary, particularly, if the State fails to 
identify and measure backwardness and 
inadequacy keeping in mind the efficiency of 
service as required under Article 335. 
xx			xx			xx
 
48. It is the equality "in fact" which has to be 
decided looking at the ground reality. 
Balancing comes in where the question 
concerns the extent of reservation. If the extent 
of reservation goes beyond cut-off point then it 
results in reverse discrimination. Anti-
discrimination legislation has a tendency of 
pushing towards de facto reservation. 
Therefore, a numerical benchmark is the 
surest immunity against charges of 
discrimination. 

49. Reservation is necessary for transcending 
caste and not for perpetuating it. Reservation 
has to be used in a limited sense otherwise it 
will perpetuate casteism in the country. 
Reservation is underwritten by a special 
justification. Equality in Article 16(1) is 
individual-specific whereas reservation in 
Article 16(4) and Article 16(4-A) is enabling. 
The discretion of the State is, however, subject 
to the existence of "backwardness" and 
"inadequacy of representation" in public 
employment. Backwardness has to be based 
on objective factors whereas inadequacy has to 
factually exist. This is where judicial review 
comes in. However, whether reservation in a 
given case is desirable or not, as a policy, is 
not for us to decide as long as the parameters 
mentioned in Articles 16(4) and 16(4-A) are 
maintained. As stated above, equity, justice 
and merit (Article 335)/efficiency are variables 
which can only be identified and measured by 
the State. Therefore, in each case, a contextual 
case has to be made out depending upon 
different circumstances which may exist State-
wise.

xx			xx			xx
 
102. In the matter of application of the 
principle of basic structure, twin tests have to 
be satisfied, namely, the "width test" and the 
test of "identity". As stated hereinabove, the 
concept of the "catch-up" rule and 
"consequential seniority" are not constitutional 
requirements. They are not implicit in clauses 
(1) and (4) of Article 16. They are not 
constitutional limitations. They are concepts 
derived from service jurisprudence. They are 
not constitutional principles. They are not 
axioms like, secularism, federalism, etc. 
Obliteration of these concepts or insertion of 
these concepts does not change the equality 
code indicated by Articles 14, 15 and 16 of the 
Constitution. Clause (1) of Article 16 cannot 
prevent the State from taking cognizance of the 
compelling interests of Backward Classes in 
the society. Clauses (1) and (4) of Article 16 are 
restatements of the principle of equality under 
Article 14. Clause (4) of Article 16 refers to 
affirmative action by way of reservation. 
Clause (4) of Article 16, however, states that 
the appropriate Government is free to provide 
for reservation in cases where it is satisfied on 
the basis of quantifiable data that Backward 
Class is inadequately represented in the 
services. Therefore, in every case  where the 
State decides to provide for reservation there 
must exist two circumstances, namely, 
"backwardness" and "inadequacy of 
representation". As stated above, equity, 
justice and efficiency are variable factors. 
These factors are context-specific. There is no 
fixed yardstick to identify and measure these 
three factors, it will depend on the facts and 
circumstances of each case. These are the 
limitations on the mode of the exercise of 
power by the State. None of these limitations 
have been removed by the impugned 
amendments. If the State concerned fails to 
identify and measure backwardness, 
inadequacy and overall administrative 
efficiency then in that event the provision for 
reservation would be invalid. These 
amendments do not alter the structure of 
Articles 14, 15 and 16 (equity code). The 
parameters mentioned in Article 16(4) are 
retained. Clause (4-A) is derived from clause 
(4) of Article 16. Clause (4-A) is confined to 
SCs and STs alone. Therefore, the present case 
does not change the identity of the 
Constitution. The word "amendment" connotes 
change. The question iswhether the 
impugned amendments discard the original 
Constitution. It was vehemently urged on 
behalf of the petitioners that the Statement of 
Objects and Reasons indicates that the 
impugned amendments have been 
promulgated by Parliament to overrule the 
decisions of this Court. We do not find any 
merit in this argument. Under Article 141 of 
the Constitution the pronouncement of this 
Court is the law of the land. The judgments of 
this Court in Virpal Singh, Ajit Singh (I), Ajit 
Singh (II) and Indra Sawhney were judgments 
delivered by this Court which enunciated the 
law of the land. It is that law which is sought 
to be changed by the impugned constitutional 
amendments. The impugned constitutional 
amendments are enabling in nature. They 
leave it to the States to provide for reservation. 
It is well settled that Parliament while enacting 
a law does not provide content to the "right". 
The content is provided by the judgments of 
the Supreme Court. If the appropriate 
Government enacts a law providing for 
reservation without keeping in mind the 
parameters in Article 16(4) and Article 335 
then this Court will certainly set aside and 
strike down such legislation. Applying the 
"width test", we do not find obliteration of any 
of the constitutional limitations. Applying the 
test of "identity", we do not find any alteration 
in the existing structure of the equality code. 
As stated above, none of the axioms like 
secularism, federalism, etc. which are 
overarching principles have been violated by 
the impugned constitutional amendments. 
Equality has two facets "formal equality" and 
"proportional equality". Proportional equality is 
equality "in fact" whereas formal equality is 
equality "in law". Formal equality exists in the 
rule of law. In the case of proportional equality 
the State is expected to take affirmative steps 
in favour of disadvantaged sections of the 
society within the framework of liberal 
democracy. Egalitarian equality is proportional 
equality. 
xx			xx			xx
107. It is important to bear in mind the nature 
of constitutional amendments. They are 
curative by nature. Article 16(4) provides for 
reservation for Backward Classes in cases of 
inadequate representation in public 
employment. Article 16(4) is enacted as a 
remedy for the past historical discriminations 
against a social class. The object in enacting 
the enabling provisions like Articles 16(4), 
16(4-A) and 16(4-B) is that the State is 
empowered to identify and recognise the 
compelling interests. If the State has 
quantifiable data to show backwardness and 
inadequacy then the State can make 
reservations in promotions keeping in mind 
maintenance of efficiency which is held to be a 
constitutional limitation on the discretion of 
the State in making reservation as indicated by 
Article 335. As stated above, the concepts of 
efficiency, backwardness, inadequacy of 
representation are required to be identified and 
measured. That exercise depends on 
availability of data. That exercise depends on 
numerous factors. It is for this reason that 
enabling provisions are required to be made 
because each competing claim seeks to achieve 
certain goals. How best one should optimise 
these conflicting claims can only be done by 
the administration in the context of local 
prevailing conditions in public employment. 
This is amply demonstrated by the various 
decisions of this Court discussed hereinabove. 
Therefore, there is a basic difference between 
"equality in law" and "equality in fact" (see 
Affirmative Action by William Darity). If Articles 
16(4-A) and 16(4-B) flow from Article 16(4) and 
if Article 16(4) is an enabling provision then 
Articles 16(4-A) and 16(4-B) are also enabling 
provisions. As long as the boundaries 
mentioned in Article 16(4), namely, 
backwardness, inadequacy and efficiency of 
administration are retained in Articles 16(4-A) 
and 16(4-B) as controlling factors, we cannot 
attribute constitutional invalidity to these 
enabling provisions. However, when the State 
fails to identify and implement the controlling 
factors then excessiveness comes in, which is 
to be decided on the facts of each case. In a 
given case, where excessiveness results in 
reverse discrimination, this Court has to 
examine individual cases and decide the 
matter in accordance with law. This is the 
theory of "guided power". We may once again 
repeat that equality is not violated by mere 
conferment of power but it is breached by 
arbitrary exercise of the power conferred". 

102.	 	In Minerva Mills Ltd. v. Union of India (1980) 3 SCC 
625) it was observed as follows:  
"57. This is not mere semantics. The edifice of 
our Constitution is built upon the concepts 
crystallised in the preamble. We resolved to 
constitute ourselves into a Socialist State 
which carried with it the obligation to secure to 
our people justice  social, economic and 
political. We, therefore, put Part IV into our 
Constitution containing directive principles of 
State policy which specify the socialistic goal to 
be achieved. We promised to our people a 
democratic polity which carries with it the 
obligation of securing to the people liberty of 
thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; 
equality of status and of opportunity and the 
assurance that the dignity of the individual 
will at all costs be preserved. We, therefore, 
put Part III in our Constitution conferring 
those rights on the people. Those rights are not 
an end in themselves but are the means to an 
end. The end is specified in Part IV. Therefore, 
the rights conferred by Part III are subject to 
reasonable restrictions and the Constitution 
provides that enforcement of some of them 
may, in stated uncommon circumstances, be 
suspended. But just as the rights conferred by 
Part III would be without a radar and a 
compass if they were not geared to an ideal, in 
the same manner the attainment of the ideals 
set out in Part IV would become a pretence for 
tyranny if the price to be paid for achieving 
that ideal is human freedoms. One of the 
faiths of our founding fathers was the purity of 
means. Indeed, under our law, even a dacoit 
who has committed a murder cannot be put to 
death in the exercise of right of self-defence 
after he has made good his escape. So great is 
the insistence of civilised laws on the purity of 
means. The goals set out in Part IV have, 
therefore, to be achieved without the 
abrogation of the means provided for by Part 
III. It is in this sense that Parts III and IV 
together constitute  the core of our 
Constitution and, combine to form its 
conscience. Anything that destroys the balance 
between the two parts will ipso facto destroy 
an essential element of the basic structure of 
our Constitution". 

103.	 The view was affirmed in T.M.A. Pai Foundation and Ors. 
v. State of Karnataka and Ors. (2002 (8) SCC 481)
104.	 It has been highlighted that Articles 15(4) and 15(5) are 
irreconcilable. It is pointed out that Article 30 is not intended 
to pamper any class of people, but is intended to assure 
minorities regarding the right to establish. In that sense, 
Article 19(1)(g) is applicable. The said right is an inalienable 
and sacrosanct  right. According to Mr. Venugopal, Article 
15(5) carved out an area from Article 15(4). Article 29(2) has to 
be read into Article  15(5) as  Articles 15(4) and 15(5) operated  
side by side. As a result of Article 15(5) by special provision 
minorities unaided rights are excluded.  Article 30 does not 
relate to any special right for protection against majority and it 
cannot be termed to be any higher right and, therefore, Article 
19(1)(g) restriction is not there.  The object is not to create 
inequality. 

105.	It is pointed out that both Articles 15(4) and 15(5) begin 
with non obstante provision. Article 15(5) is a later 
introduction. It is stated that Article 15(1) has to prevail over 
Article 15(4) and the right given to certain class of people in 
Article 15(4) gets eliminated because of Article 15(5).

106.	Provisions of the Constitution have to be read 
harmoniously and no part can be treated  to be redundant.  In 
our considered view both the provisions operate in different 
areas though there may be some amount of overlapping but 
that does not in any way lead to the conclusion that Article 
15(5) takes away what is provided in Article 15(4).

 107.	A construction which reduces the statute to a 
futility has to be avoided. A statute or any enacting provision 
therein must be so construed as to make it effective and 
operative on the principle expressed in the maxim ut res magis 
valeat quam pereat i.e. a liberal construction should be put 
upon written instruments, so as to uphold them, if possible, 
and carry into effect the intention of the parties. [See Broom's 
Legal Maxims (10th Edn.), p.   361, Craies on Statutes (7th 
Edn.), p.   95 and Maxwell on Statutes (11th Edn.).

108.	 	A statute is designed to be workable and the 
interpretation thereof by a court should be to secure that 
object unless crucial omission or clear direction makes that 
end unattainable. (See Whitney v. IRC (1926 AC 37) at p. 52 
referred to in CIT v. S. Teja Singh (AIR 1959 SC 352) and 
Gursahai Saigal v. CIT (AIR 1963 SC 1062).
 109.	The courts will have to reject that construction 
which will defeat the plain intention of the legislature even 
though there may be some inexactitude in the language used. 
(See Salmon v. Duncombe (1886) 11AC 627 at p.634, Curtis v. 
Stovin (1889) 22 QBD 513) referred to in S. Teja Singh case .) 
110.		If the choice is between two interpretations, the 
narrower of which would fail to achieve the manifest purpose 
of the legislation, we should avoid a construction which would 
reduce the legislation to futility, and should rather accept the 
bolder construction, based on the view that Parliament would 
legislate only for the purpose of bringing about an effective 
result. (See Nokes v. Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries (1940 
(3) All ER 549) referred to in Pye v. Minister for Lands for NSW 
(1954) 3 All ER 514.  The principles indicated in the said cases 
were reiterated by this Court in Mohan Kumar Singhania v. 
Union of India  (1992 Supp (1) SCC 594).

 111.		The statute must be read as a whole and one 
provision of the Act should be construed with reference to 
other provisions in the same Act so as to make a consistent 
enactment of the whole statute.

 112.		The court must ascertain the intention of the 
legislature by directing its attention not merely to the clauses 
to be construed but to the entire statute; it must compare the 
clause with other parts of the law and the setting in which the 
clause to be interpreted occurs. (See R.S. Raghunath v. State of 
Karnataka (1992) 1 SCC 335) Such a construction has the 
merit of avoiding any inconsistency or repugnancy either 
within a section or between two different sections or provisions 
of the same statute. It is the duty of the court to avoid a head-
on clash between two sections of the same Act. (See Sultana 
Begum v. Prem Chand Jain 1997 (1) SCC 373.)
  
 113.	Whenever it is possible to do so, it must be done to 
construe the provisions which appear to conflict so that they 
harmonise. It should not be lightly assumed that Parliament 
had given with one hand what it took away with the other. 
114.	    The provisions of one section of the statute cannot be 
used to defeat those of another unless it is impossible to effect 
reconciliation between them. Thus a construction that reduces 
one of the provisions to a "useless lumber" or "dead letter" is 
not a harmonized construction. To harmonise is not to 
destroy. 

115.		The Constitution of India is not intended to be 
static. It is by its very nature dynamic. It is a living and 
organic thing. It is an instrument which has greatest value to 
be construed.  "Ut Res Valeat Potius Quam Pereat" (the 
construction should be preferred which makes the machinery 
workable). Our Constitution reflects the beliefs and political 
aspirations of those who had framed it. It is therefore desirable 
that while considering the question as to whether 27% fixed 
for the other backward classes to be maintained without 
definite data the rights of those who belong to the unfortunate 
categories of other economic backward classes deserve to be 
concerned, else there shall be  no definite determination of 
number of other backward classes. While fixing the measure 
for creamy layer it would not be difficult also to fix the norms 
for the socially and economically backward classes rather the 
latter exercise would be easier to undertake.

116.	 In Indra Sawhney's No.1 the desirability of excluding 
some posts from the zone of reservation was highlighted. It was 
also emphasized that periodic  review of policy of reservation 
was imperative. It was inter-alia observed as follows:
"838.   While on Article 335, we are of the 
opinion that there are certain services and 
positions where either on account of the 
nature of duties attached to them or the level 
(in the hierarchy) at which they obtain, merit 
as explained hereinabove,  alone counts.  In 
such situations, it may not be advisable to 
provide for reservations. For example technical 
posts in research and development 
organizations/departments/institutions, in 
specialties and super-specialties in medicine, 
Engineering and other such courses in 
physical sciences and mathematics in defence 
services and in the establishment connected 
therewith.  Similarly, in the case of posts at 
the higher echelons e.g. Professors (in 
Education), Pilots in Indian Airlines and Air 
India, Scientists and Technicians in Nuclear 
and Space application, provision for 
reservation would not be advisable.
	xx			xx			xx
840.	We may point out that the services/posts 
enumerated above, on account of their nature 
and duties attached, are such as call for 
highest level of intelligence, skill and 
excellence.  Some of them are second level and 
third level posts in the ascending order.  
Hence, they form a category apart.  
Reservation therein may not be consistent with 
"efficiency of administration" contemplated by 
Article 335.
		xx		xx			xx
859. "We may summarise our answers to the 
various questions dealt with and answered 
hereinabove;
(1)	(a) It is not necessary that the 
'provision' under Article 16(4) should 
necessarily be made by the 
Parliament/Legislature.  Such a 
provision can be made by the 
Executive also.  Local bodies, 
statutory Corporations and other 
instrumentalities of the State falling 
under Article 12 of the Constitution 
are themselves competent to make 
such a provision, if so advised. 

(b)	An executive order making a 
provision under Article 16(4) is 
enforceable the moment it is made 
and issued.  
(2)	(a)	Clause (4) of Article 16 is not an 
exception to clause (1).  It is an 
instance and an illustration of the 
classification inherent in clause (1).
(b)	Article 16(4) is exhaustive of the 
subject of reservation in favour of 
backward class of citizens, as 
explained in this judgment.  
	(c)	Reservations can also be 
provided under	clause (1) of Article 
16.  It is not confined to extending of 
preferences, concessions or 
exemptions alone.  These 
reservations, if any, made under 
clause (1) have to be so adjusted and 
implemented as not to exceed the 
level of representation prescribed for 
'backward class of citizens'  as 
explained in this judgment.
3.	(a)	A caste can be and quite often is 
a social class in India.  If it is 
backward socially, it would be a 
backward class for the purposes of 
Article 16(4).  Among non-Hindus, 
there are several occupational 
groups, sets and denominations, 
which for historical reasons are 
socially backward.  They too 
represent backward, social 
collectivities for the purposes of 
Article 16(4).
	(b)	Neither the Constitution nor the 
law prescribes the procedure or 
method of identification of backward 
classes. Nor is it possible or advisable 
for the court to lay down any such 
procedure or method.  It must be left 
to the authority appointed to identify.  
It can adopt such method/procedure 
as it thinks convenient and so long as 
its survey covers the entire populace, 
no objection can be taken to it.  
Identification of the backward classes 
can certainly be done with reference 
to castes among, and alongwith, 
other occupational groups, classes 
and sections of people.  One can start 
the process either with occupational 
groups or with castes or with some 
other groups.  Thus one can start the 
process with castes, wherever they 
are found, apply the criteria (evolved 
for determining backwardness) and 
find out whether it satisfy the criteria.  
If it does-what emerges is a 
"backward class of citizens" within 
the meaning of and for the purposes 
of Article 16(4).  Similar process can 
be adopted in the case of other 
occupational groups, communities 
and classes so as to cover the entire 
populace.  The central idea and 
overall objective should be to consider 
all available groups, sections and 
classes in society.  Since caste 
represents an existing, identifiable 
social group/class encompassing an 
overwhelming minority of the 
country's population, one can well 
begin with it and then go to other 
groups, sections and classes.
(c)	It is not correct to say that the 
backward class of citizens 
contemplated in Article 16(4) is the 
same as the socially and 
educationally backward classes 
referred to in Article 15(4).  It is much 
wider.  The accent in Article 16(4) is 
on social backwardness. Of course, 
social, educational and economic 
backwardness are closely inter-
twined in the Indian context.
(d)	'Creamy layer' can be, and must 
be excluded.
(e)	It is not necessary for a class to 
be designated as a backward class 
that it is situated similarly to the 
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
f)	The adequacy of representation 
of a particular class in the services 
under the State is a matter within the 
subjective satisfaction of the 
appropriate Government.  The 
judicial scrutiny in that behalf is the 
same as in other matters within the 
subjective satisfaction of an 
authority.
(4) 	(a) A backward class of citizens 
cannot be identified only and 
exclusively with reference to 
economic criteria.
(b) 	It is, of course, permissible for 
the Government or other authority to 
identify a backward class of citizens 
on the basis of occupation cum 
income, without reference to caste, if 
it is so advised.
5.	There is no constitutional bar to 
classify the backward classes of citizens 
into backward and more backward 
categories.
6.	(a) and (b) The reservations 
contemplated in clause (4) of Article 16 
should not exceed 50%. While 50% shall 
be the rule, it is necessary not to put out of 
consideration certain extra ordinary 
situation inherent in the great diversity of 
this country and the people.

117.	 In Vasanth Kumar's case (supra) at para 2(4), it was 
observed as follows:
"2(4). The policy of reservations in 
employment, education and legislative 
institutions should be reviewed every five years 
or so. That will at once afford an opportunity (i) 
to the State to rectify distortions arising out of 
particular facets of the reservation policy and 
(ii) to the people, both backward and non-
backward, to ventilate their views in a public 
debate on the practical impact of the policy of 
reservations."

118.	  In State of A.P. &amp; Anr. v. P. Sagar  (1968 (3) SCR 595)  
at para 15, it was observed as follows: 
"Article 15 guarantees by the first clause a 
fundamental right of far-reaching importance 
to the public generally. Within certain defined 
limits an exception has been engrafted upon 
the guarantee of the freedom in cl. (1), but 
being in the nature of an exception, the 
conditions which justify departure must be 
strictly shown to exist. When a dispute is 
raised before a Court that a particular law 
which is inconsistent with the guarantee 
against discrimination is valid on the plea that 
it is permitted under clause (4) of Art. 15 the 
assertion by the State that the officers of the 
State had taken into consideration the criteria 
which had been adopted by the Courts for 
determining who the socially and educationally 
backward classes of the Society are, or that the 
authorities had acted in good faith in 
determining the socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens, would not be 
sufficient to sustain the validity of the claim. 
The Courts of the country are invested with 
the power to determine the validity of the law 
which infringes the fundamental rights of 
citizens and others and when a question arises 
whether a law which prima facie infringes a 
guaranteed fundamental right is within an 
exception, the validity of that law has to be 
determined by the Courts on materials placed 
before them. By merely asserting that the law 
was made after full consideration of the 
relevant evidence and criteria which have a 
bearing thereon, and was within the exception, 
the jurisdiction of the Courts to determine 
whether by making the law a fundamental 
right has been infringed is not excluded." 

119.	Significant observations were made in  Kumari K.S. 
Jayasree and Anr. v. The State of Kerala and Anr. (1976 (3) 
SCC 730 ). At para 22 it was noted as follows: 
."The problem of determining who are socially 
and educationally backward classes is 
undoubtedly not simple. Sociological and 
economic considerations come into play in 
evolving proper criteria for its determination. 
This is the function of the State. The Court's 
jurisdiction is to decide whether the tests 
applied are valid. If it appears that tests 
applied are proper and valid the classification 
of socially and educationally backward classes 
based on the tests will have to be consistent 
with the requirements of Article 15(4). The 
Commission has found on applying the 
relevant tests that the lower income group of 
the communities named in Appendix VIII of the 
Report constitute the socially and 
educationally backward classes. In dealing 
with the question as to whether any class of 
citizens is socially backward or not, it may not 
be irrelevant to consider the caste of the said 
group of citizens. It is necessary to remember 
that special provision is contemplated for 
classes of citizens and not for individual 
citizens as such, and so though the caste of 
the group of citizen may be relevant, its 
importance should not be exaggerated. If the 
classification is based solely on caste of the 
citizen, it may not be logical. Social 
backwardness is the result of poverty to a very 
large extent. Caste and poverty are both 
relevant for determining the backwardness. 
But neither caste alone nor poverty alone will 
be the determining tests. When the 
Commission has determined a class to be 
socially and educationally backward it is not 
on the basis of income alone, and the 
determination is based on the relevant criteria 
laid down by the Court. Evidence and material 
are placed before the Commission. Article 15(4) 
which speaks of backwardness of classes of 
citizens indicates that the accent is on classes 
of citizens. Article 15(4) also speaks of 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 
Therefore, socially and educationally backward 
classes of citizens in Article 15(4) cannot be 
equated with castes. In R. Chitralekha and 
Anr. v. State of Mysore and Ors. ( 1964 (6) SCR 
368 ) this Court said that the classification of 
backward classes based on economic 
conditions and occupations does not offend 
Article 15(4)."

120.	  Further, in Minor A. Peeriakaruppan, Sobha Joseph v. 
State of Tamil Nadu and Ors.   (1971 (1) SCC 38)  at para 29 it 
was observed as follows:
"Rajendran's case (1968 (2) SCR 786) is an 
authority for the proposition that the 
classification of backward classes on the basis 
of castes is within the purview of Article 15(4) 
if those castes are shown to be socially and 
educationally backward. No further material 
has been placed before us to show that the 
reservation for backward classes with which 
we are herein concerned is not in accordance 
with Article 15(4). There is no gainsaying the 
fact the there are numerous castes in this 
country which are socially and educationally 
backward. To ignore their existence is to ignore 
the facts of life. Hence we are unable to uphold 
the contention that impugned reservation is 
not in accordance with Article 15(4). But all 
the same the Government should not proceed 
on the basis that once a class is considered as 
a backward class it should continue to be 
backward class for all times. Such an 
approach would defeat the very purpose of the 
reservation because once a class reaches a 
stage of progress which some modern writers 
call as take off stage then competition is 
necessary for their future progress. The 
Government should always keep under review 
the question of reservation of seats and only 
the classes which are really socially and 
educationally backward should be allowed to 
have the benefit of reservation. Reservation of 
seats should not be allowed to become a vested 
interest. The fact that candidates of backward 
classes have secured about 50% of the seats in 
the general pool does show that the time has 
come for a de novo comprehensive examination 
of the question. It must be remembered that 
the Government's decision in this regard is 
open to judicial review."

121.	It has been highlighted that the Act has been made 
applicable to Central Educational Institutions established, 
maintained or aided by the Central Government. Central 
Educational Institutions have been defined in Section 2(d) as 
follows:
	"2(d) Central Educational Institution" means-

(i)	a university established or 
incorporated by or under a Central 
Act;

(ii)	an institution of national 
importance set up by an Act of 
Parliament;

(iii)	an institution, declared as a deemed 
University under Section 3 of the 
University Grants Commission Act, 
1956 and maintained by or receiving 
aid from the Central Government;

(iv)	an institution maintained by or 
receiving aid from the Central 
Government, whether directly or 
indirectly, and affiliated to an 
institution referred to in clause (i) or 
clause (ii), or a constituent unit of 
an institution  referred to in clause 
(iii);

(v)	an educational institution set up by 
the Central Government under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860."

122.	  It is pointed out that there cannot be any reservations 
in respect of super specialities and institutions imparting 
education of highly complex subjects. The example of All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences has been given. It has been 
pointed out that its status as an institution for super 
speciality has been judicially recognized. It needs to be noted 
that in terms of Section 4(b) of the Act certain educational 
institutions have been excluded from the operation of the Act. 

123.	 The Act has been made inapplicable to them. It is to be 
noted that in the said provision, institutions of research, 
institutions of excellence, institutions of national and strategic 
importance have been specified in the Schedule to the Act.  
The proviso permits the Central Government as and when 
considered necessary to amend the Schedule. In other words, 
on an appropriate case being presented and established before 
the Central Government that the Institution is of excellence 
and/or a research institute and/or an institution of national 
and  strategic importance, the Central Government can amend 
the Schedule and include such institution in the Schedule.  In 
other words, it is permissible for the petitioners and anybody 
else to highlight to the Government about the desirability to 
include an Institution in the Schedule of the Act. 

124.	 One of the major issues highlighted by Mr. P.P. Rao was 
that in several cases the matriculation standard of education 
was considered to be the measure for measuring 
backwardness. It is, therefore, submitted that when at least 
half of the persons belonging to a particular  caste have 
reached the matriculation level of education, they cannot be 
considered to be educationally backward any longer. It is 
therefore submitted that if that be taken as a yardstick for 
measuring backwardness then the reservation of seats for 
technical education or in higher studies  cannot be sustained. 
It has also been highlighted that the shift of emphasis from 
primary and basic education to higher education is against the 
constitutional mandate making education compulsory in 
terms of Article 21-A of the Constitution. It is not correct to 
contend that in fixing the priorities the Government is the best 
Judge as contended by the respondents. It may be correct in 
matters relating to simple policy decisions but when the 
constitutional mandate is under consideration the underlying 
object has also to be kept in view. In this context reference is 
made to Article 46 of the Constitution. It is in that background 
pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioners  that what 
cannot be lost sight of is the fact that is  the foundation for 
basic, elementary and primary education. The educational 
backwardness can be obliterated when at least half of the 
persons belonging to a particular caste come up to a 
matriculation level. 

125.	   There is substance in this plea. It is not merely the 
existence of schemes but the effective implementation of the 
schemes that is important. It is to be noted that financial 
constraint cannot be a ground to deny fundamental rights and 
the provision for the schemes and the utilization of the funds 
are also relevant factors.  It appears that better coordination 
between the funds provider and the utiliser is necessary.  It is 
suggested that putting stress on cut off limit by shifting from  
matriculation to Class XII level education as a benchmark of 
gauging educational backwardness will be a step in the right 
direction. Though as rightly contended by Mr. P.P. Rao that in 
several decisions, for example, M.R. Balaji's case (supra), 
Balram's case (supra) and Kumari K.S. Jayasree's case  
(supra) the secondary education was taken to be the 
benchmark, ground reality cannot be lost sight of that with 
the limited availability of jobs and the spiraling increase in 
population, secondary or matriculation examination can no 
longer be considered to be an appropriate bench mark. It has 
to be at the most graduation. But the question arises whether 
technical education can be included while considering 
educational backwardness. A delicate balancing has to be 
done in this regard. While technical education cannot be the 
sole criteria  for gauging educational backwardness it 
definitely will form part of 50 per cent norms fixed by this 
Court. Slightly variable plus or minus would be the 
appropriate standard to gauge educational backwardness. 

126.	 One of the grey areas which have been highlighted by 
learned counsel for the petitioners is that caste is not a 
substitute for class and nevertheless the two terms are not 
synonyms. Much of the argument in this regard is centred 
round the paragraphs 782 and 783 of Indra Sawhney No.1 
(supra). The same read as under:
"782. Coming back to the question of 
identification, the fact remains that one has to 
begin somewhere  with some group, class or 
section. There is no set or recognised method. 
There is no law or other statutory instrument 
prescribing the methodology. The ultimate idea 
is to survey the entire populace. If so, one can 
well begin with castes, which represent explicit 
identifiable social classes/groupings, more 
particularly when Article 16(4) seeks to 
ameliorate social backwardness. What is 
unconstitutional with it, more so when caste, 
occupation poverty and social backwardness 
are so closely intertwined in our society? 
[Individual survey is out of question, since 
Article 16(4) speaks of class protection and not 
individual protection]. This does not mean that 
one can wind up the process of identification 
with the castes. Besides castes (whether found 
among Hindus or others) there may be other 
communities, groups, classes and 
denominations which may qualify as backward 
class of citizens. For example, in a particular 
State, Muslim community as a whole may be 
found socially backward. (As a matter of fact, 
they are so treated in the State of Karnataka 
as well as in the State of Kerala by their 
respective State Governments). Similarly, 
certain sections and denominations among 
Christians in Kerala who were included among 
backward communities notified in the former 
princely State of Travancore as far back as in 
1935 may also be surveyed and so on and so 
forth. Any authority entrusted with the task of 
identifying backward classes may well start 
with the castes. It can take caste 'A', apply the 
criteria of backwardness evolved by it to that 
caste and determine whether it qualifies as a 
backward class or not. If it does qualify, what 
emerges is a backward class, for the purposes 
of clause (4) of Article 16. The concept of 'caste' 
in this behalf is not confined to castes among 
Hindus. It extends to castes, wherever they 
obtain as a fact, irrespective of religious 
sanction for such practice. Having exhausted 
the castes or simultaneously with it, the 
authority may take up for consideration other 
occupational groups, communities and 
classes. For example, it may take up the 
Muslim community (after excluding those 
sections, castes and groups, if any, who have 
already been considered) and find out whether 
it can be characterised as a backward class in 
that State or region, as the case may be. The 
approach may differ from State to State since 
the conditions in each State may differ from 
State to State since the conditions in each 
State may differ.  Nay, even within a State, 
conditions may differ from region to region. 
Similarly, Christians may also be considered. If 
in a given place, like Kerala, there are several 
denominations, sections or divisions, each of 
these groups may separately be considered. In 
this manner, all the classes among the 
populace will be covered and that is the central 
idea. The effort should be to consider all the 
available groups, sections and classes of 
society in whichever order one proceeds. Since 
caste represents an existing, identifiable, social 
group spread over an over whelming majority 
of the country's population, we say one may 
well begin with castes, if one so chooses, and 
then go to other groups, sections and classes. 
We may say, at this stage, that we broadly 
commend the approach and methodology 
adopted by the Justice O. Chinnappa Reddy 
Commission in this respect.  

 783. We do not mean to suggest  we may 
reiterate  that the procedure indicated 
hereinabove is the only procedure or 
method/approach to be adopted. Indeed, there 
is no such thing as a standard or model 
procedure/approach. It is for the authority 
(appointed to identify) to adopt such approach 
and procedure as it thinks appropriate, and so 
long as the approach adopted by it is fair and 
adequate, the court has no say in the matter. 
The only object of the discussion in the 
preceding para is to emphasise that if a 
Commission/Authority begins its process of 
identification with castes (among Hindus) and 
occupational groupings among others, it 
cannot by that reason alone be said to be 
constitutionally or legally bad. We must also 
say that there is no rule of law that a test to be 
applied for identifying backward classes 
should be only one and/or uniform. In a vast 
country like India, it is simply not practicable. 
If the real object is to discover and locate 
backwardness, and if such backwardness is 
found in a caste, it can be treated as 
backward; if it is found in any other group, 
section or class, they too can be treated as 
backward."

 127.	   On a closer reading of the paragraphs it appears that 
this Court took note of the fact that several religions do not 
have any caste. Therefore, the first sentence of para`782 lays 
emphasis to begin somewhere  with some group, class or 
section. It also states that there is no set or recognized method 
and there is no law or other statutory instrument prescribing 
the methodology.  In this context, it has also been stated that 
one can well begin with castes which represent explicit 
identifiable social classes or groupings. Therefore, the 
emphasis was on beginning with castes which represent as 
explicit identifiable social classes or grouping. Again in 
paragraph 783, it has been stated that in a vast country like 
India it is simply not practicable to fix the test for identifying  
backward classes.  In that background it was held that if the 
real objective is to discover and locate the real backwardness 
and if such backwardness is found in a caste it can be 
considered as backwardness. Similarly if it is found in any 
other group, section or class they too can be treated as 
backward.  The intention therefore is clear that  if caste is 
found to be backward it can certainly be treated as backward. 
To give  any other meaning would be  adding or subtracting to 
what has been specifically stated in the decision. 

128.	   It is also relevant to take note of certain earlier 
decisions referred to in Indra Sawhney No.1 case (supra) 
which throw beacon light on the issue. They are as under: 
	1. M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore,1963 
Supp (1) SCR 439 
 
"Article 15(4) authorises the State to make a 
special provision for the advancement of any 
socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens, as distinguished from the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. No doubt, 
special provision can be made for both 
categories of citizens, but in specifying the 
categories, the first category is distinguished 
from the second. Sub-clauses (24) and (25) of 
Article 366 define Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes respectively, but there is no 
clause defining socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens, and so, in 
determining the question as to whether a 
particular provision has been validly made 
under Article 15(4) or not, the first question 
which falls to be determined is whether the 
State has validly determined who should be 
included in these Backward Classes. It seems 
fairly clear that the backward classes of 
citizens for whom special provision is 
authorised to be made are, by Article 15(4) 
itself, treated as being similar to the Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes which have been 
defined were known to be backward and the 
Constitution-makers felt no doubt that special 
provision had to be made for their 
advancement. It was realised that in the Indian 
Society there were other classes of citizens who 
were equally, or may be somewhat less, 
backward than the Scheduled Castes and 
Tribes and it was thought that some special 
provision ought to be made even for them. 

	 Let us take the question of social 
backwardness first. By what test should it be 
decided whether a particular class is socially 
backward or not? The group of citizens to 
whom Article 15(4) applies are described as 
"classes of citizens", not as castes of citizens. A 
class, according to the dictionary meaning, 
shows division of society according to status, 
rank or caste. In the Hindu social structure, 
caste unfortunately plays an important part in 
determining the status of the citizen. Though 
according to sociologists and vedic scholars, 
the caste system may have originally begun on 
occupational or functional basis, in course of 
time, it became rigid and inflexible. The history 
of the growth of caste system shows that its 
original functional and occupational basis was 
later over-burdened with considerations of 
purity based on ritual concepts, and that led to 
its ramifications which introduced inflexibility 
and rigidity. This artificial growth inevitably 
tended to create a feeling of superiority and 
inferiority, and to foster narrow caste loyalties. 
Therefore, in dealing with the question as to 
whether any class of citizens is socially 
backward or not, it may not be irrelevant to 
consider the caste of the said group of citizens. 
In this connection it is, however, necessary to 
bear in mind that the special provision is 
contemplated for classes of citizens and not for 
individual citizens as such, and so, though the 
caste of the group of citizens may be relevant, 
its importance should not be exaggerated. If 
the classification of backward classes of 
citizens was based solely on the caste of the 
citizen, it may not always be logical and may 
perhaps contain the vice of perpetuating the 
castes themselves. 

	xx			xx		xx			
		
 
 Besides, if the caste of the group of 
citizens was made the sole basis for 
determining the social backwardness of the 
said group, that test would inevitably break 
down in relation to many sections of Indian 
society which do not recognise castes in the 
conventional sense known to Hindu society. 
How is one going to decide whether Muslims, 
Christians or Jains, or even Lingayats are 
socially backward or not? The test of castes 
would be inapplicable to those groups, but 
that would hardly justify the exclusion of these 
groups in toto from the operation of Article 
15(4). It is not unlikely that in some States 
some Muslims or Christians or Jains forming 
groups may be socially backward. That is why 
we think that though castes in relation to 
Hindus may be a relevant factor to consider in 
determining the social backwardness of groups 
or classes of citizens, it cannot be made the 
sole or the dominant test in that behalf. Social 
backwardness is on the ultimate analysis the 
result of poverty to a very large extent. The 
classes of citizens who are deplorably poor 
automatically become socially backward. They 
do not enjoy a status in society and have, 
therefore, to be content to take a backward 
seat. It is true that social backwardness which 
results from poverty is likely to be aggravated 
by considerations of caste to which the poor 
citizens may belong, but that only shows the 
relevance of both caste and poverty in 
determining the backwardness of citizens.

2. 	R. Chitralekha v State of Mysore AIR 1964 
SC 1823


	Justice Subba Rao referred to the 
observations in M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore 
and observed:

"15. Two principles stand out prominently 
from the said observations, namely, (i) the 
caste of a group of citizens may be a relevant 
circumstance in ascertaining their social 
backwardness; and (ii) though it is a relevant 
factor to determine the social backwardness of 
a class of citizens, it cannot be the dole or 
dominant test in that behalf. The observations 
extracted in the judgment of the High Court 
appear to be in conduct with the observations 
of this Court. While this Court said that caste 
is only a relevant circumstance and that it 
cannot be the dominant test in ascertaining 
the backwardness of a class of citizens, the 
High Court said that it is an important basis in 
determining the class of backward Hindus and 
that the Government should have adopted 
caste as one of the tests. As the said 
observations made by the High Court may lead 
to some confusion in the mind of the authority 
concerned who may be entrusted with the duty 
of prescribing the rules for ascertaining the 
backwardness of classes of citizens within the 
meaning of Art. 15(4) of the Constitution, we 
would hasten to make it clear that caste is 
only a relevant circumstance in ascertaining 
the backwardness of a class and there is 
nothing in the judgment of this Court which 
precludes the authority concerned from 
determining the social backwardness of a 
group of citizens if it can do so without 
reference to caste. While this Court has not 
excluded caste from ascertaining the 
backwardness of a class of citizens, it has not 
made it one of the compelling circumstances 
affording a basis for the ascertainment of 
backwardness of a class. To put it differently, 
the authority concerned may take caste into 
consideration in ascertaining the 
backwardness of a group of persons; but, if it 
does not, its order will not be bad on that 
account, if it can ascertain the backwardness 
of a group of persons on the basis of other 
relevant criteria.

19The important factor to be noticed in 
Art. 15(4) is that it does not speak of castes, 
but only speaks of classes. If the makers of the 
Constitution intended to take castes also as 
units of social and educational backwardness, 
they would have said so as they have said in 
the case of the Scheduled Castes and the 
Scheduled Tribes. Though it may be suggested 
that the wider expression "classes" is used in 
clause (4) of Art. 15 as there are communities 
without castes, if the intention was to equate 
classes with castes, nothing prevented the 
makers of the Constitution from using the 
expression "backward classes or castes". The 
juxtaposition of the expression "backward 
classes" and "Scheduled Castes" in Art. 15(4) 
also leads to a reasonable inference that the 
expression "classes" is not synonymous with 
castes. It may be that for ascertaining whether 
a particular citizen or a group of citizens 
belong to a backward class or not, his or their 
caste may have some relevance, but it cannot 
be either the sole or the dominant criterion for 
ascertaining the class to which he or they 
belong.

20. 	This interpretation will carry out the 
intention of the Constitution expressed in the 
aforesaid Articles. It helps the really backward 
classes instead of promoting the interests of 
individuals or groups who, though they belong 
to a particular caste a majority whereof is 
socially and educationally backward, really 
belong to a class which is socially and 
educationally advanced. To illustrate, take a 
caste in a State which is numerically the 
largest therein. It may be that though a 
majority of the people in that caste are socially 
and educationally backward, an effective 
minority may be socially and educationally far 
more advanced than another small sub-caste 
the total number of which is far less than the 
said minority. If we interpret the expression 
"classes" as "castes", the object of the 
Constitution will be frustrated and the people 
who do not deserve any adventitious aid may 
get it to the exclusion of those who really 
deserve. This anomaly will not arise if, without 
equating caste with class, caste is taken as 
only one of the considerations to ascertain 
whether a person belongs to a backward class 
or not. On the other hand, if the entire sub-
caste, by and large, is backward, it may be 
included in the Scheduled Castes by following 
the appropriate procedure laid down by the 
Constitution.
21. 	We do not intend to lay down any 
inflexible rule for the Government to follow. 
The laying down of criteria for ascertainment of 
social and educational backwardness of a class 
is a complex problem depending upon many 
circumstances which may vary from State to 
State and even from place to place in a State. 
But what we intend to emphasize is that under 
no circumstances a "class" can be equated to a 
"caste", though the caste of an individual or a 
group of individual may be considered along 
with other relevant factors in putting him in a 
particular class. We would also like to make it 
clear that if in a given situation caste is 
excluded in ascertaining a class within the 
meaning of Art. 15(4) of the Constitution, it 
does not vitiate the classification if it satisfied 
other tests.
3.	Minor P. Rajendran v State of Madras 
(1968 (2) SCR 787)

"The first challenge is to r. 5 on the ground 
that it violates Art. 15 of the Constitution. 
Article 15 forbids discrimination against any 
citizen on the grounds only of religion, race, 
caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. At the 
same time Art. 15(4) inter alia permits the 
State to make any special provision for the 
advancement of any socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens. The contention is 
that the list of socially and educationally 
backward classes for whom reservation is 
made under r. 5 is nothing but a list of certain 
castes. Therefore, reservation in favour of 
certain castes based only on caste 
considerations violates Art. 15(1), which 
prohibits discrimination on the ground o caste 
only. Now if the reservation in question had 
been based only on caste and had not taken 
into account the social and educational 
backwardness of the caste in question, it 
would be violative of Art. 15(1). But it must not 
be forgotten that a caste is also a class of 
citizens and if the caste as a whole is socially 
and educationally backward reservation can be 
made in favour of such a caste on the ground 
that it is a socially and educationally backward 
class of citizens within the meaning of Art. 
15(4). Reference in this connection may be 
made to the observations of this Court in M. R. 
Balaji v. State of Mysore ([1963] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 
439 at p. 459-460) to the effect that it was not 
irrelevant to consider the caste of a class of 
citizens in determining their social and 
educational backwardness. It was further 
observed that though the caste of a class of 
citizens may be relevant its importance should 
not be exaggerated; and if classification of 
backward classes of citizens was based solely 
on the caste of the citizen, it might be open to 
objection. It is true that in the present cases 
the list of socially and educationally backward 
classes has been specified by caste. But that 
does not necessarily mean that caste was the 
sole consideration and that persons belonging 
to these castes are also not a class of socially 
and educationally backward citizens. In its 
reply, the State of Madras has given the 
history as to how this list of backward classes 
was made, starting from the year 1906 and 
how the list has been kept upto date and 
necessary amendments made therein. It has 
also been stated that the main criterion for 
inclusion in the list was the social and 
educational backwardness of the caste based 
on occupations pursued by these castes. 
Because the members of the caste as a whole 
were found to be socially and educationally 
backward, they were put in the list. The matter 
was finally examined after the Constitution 
came into force in the light of the provisions 
contained in Art. 15(4). As it was found that 
members of these castes as a whole were 
educationally and socially backward, the list 
which had been coming on from as far back as 
1906 was finally adopted for purposes of Art. 
15(4). In short the case of the State of Madras 
is that the castes included in the list are only a 
compendious indication of the class of people 
in those castes and these classes of people had 
been put in the list for the purpose of Art. 
15(4) because they had been found to be 
socially and educationally backward.

This is the position as explained in the 
Affidavit filed on behalf of the State of Madras. 
On the other hand the only thing stated in the 
petitions is that as the list is based on caste 
alone it is violative of Art. 15(1). In view 
however of the explanation given by the State 
of Madras, which has not been controverted by 
any rejoinder, it must be accepted that though 
the list shows certain castes, the members of 
those castes are really classes of educationally 
and socially backward citizens. No attempt was 
made on behalf of the petitioners/appellant to 
show that any caste mentioned in this list was 
not educationally and socially backward. No 
such averment was made in the affidavit in 
support of their cases, nor was any attempt 
made to traverse the case put forward on 
behalf of the State of Madras by filing a 
rejoinder affidavit to show that even one of the 
castes included in the list was not 
educationally and socially backward. In this 
state of the pleadings, we must come to the 
conclusion that though the list is prepared 
caste-wise, the castes included therein are as a 
whole educationally and socially backward and 
therefore the list is not violate of Art. 15. The 
challenge to r. 5 must therefore fail.

4)	State of Andhra Pradesh v P. Sagar 
(1968 (3) SCR 595)

"In the context in which it occurs the 
expression "class" means a homogeneous 
section of the people grouped together because 
of certain likenesses or common traits and 
who are identifiable by some common 
attributes such as status, rank, occupation, 
residence in a locality, race, religion and the 
like. In determining whether a particular 
section forms a class, caste cannot be 
excluded altogether. But in the determination 
of a class a test solely based upon the caste or 
community cannot also be accepted. By cl. (1) 
Art. 15 prohibits the State from discriminating 
against any citizen on grounds only of religion, 
race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them. 
By cl. (3) of Art. 15 the State is, 
notwithstanding the provision contained in cl. 
(1), permitted to make special provision for 
women and children. By cl. (4) a special 
provision for the advancement of any socially 
and educationally backward classes of citizens 
or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes is outside the purview of cl. (1). But cl. 
(4) is an exception to cl. (1). Being an 
exception, it cannot be extended so as in effect 
to destroy the guarantee of cl. (1). The 
Parliament has by enacting cl. (4) attempted to 
balance as against the right of equality of 
citizens the special necessities of the weaker 
sections of the people by allowing a provision 
to be made for their advancement. In order 
that effect may be given to cl. (4), it must 
appear that the beneficiaries of the special 
provision are classes which are backward 
socially and educationally and they are other 
that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, and that the provision made is for their 
advancement."

5.	Minor A. Peeriakaruppan (Minor) v. 
State of T.N., (1971) 1 SCC 38 : 
"25. A caste has always been recognized as 
a class. In construing the expression "classes 
of His Majesty's subject" found in Section 153-
A of the Indian Penal Code, Wassoodew, J., 
observed in Narayan Vasudev v. Emperor AIR 
1940 Bomb 379
"In my opinion, the expression 
'classes of His Majesty's subjects' in 
Section 153-A of the Code is used in 
restrictive sense as denoting a 
collection of individuals or groups 
bearing a common and exclusive 
designation and also possessing 
common and exclusive 
characteristics which may be 
associated with their origin, race or 
religion, and that the term 'class' 
within that section carries with it 
the idea of numerical strength so 
large as could be grouped in a single 
homogeneous community."
26. In para 10, Chapter V of the Backward 
Classes Commission's Report, it is observed:
"We tried to avoid caste but we find 
it difficult to ignore caste in the 
present prevailing conditions. We 
wish it were easy to dissociate caste 
from social backwardness at the 
present juncture. In modern time 
anybody can take to any profession. 
The Brahman taking to tailoring, 
does not become a tailor by caste, 
nor is his social status lowered as a 
Brahman. A Brahman may be a 
seller of boots and shoes, and yet 
his social status is not lowered 
thereby. Social backwardness, 
therefore, is not today due to the 
particular profession of a person, 
but we cannot escape caste in 
considering the social backwardness 
in India. 

In para 11 of that Report it is stated:

	"It is not wrong to assume that social 
backwardness has largely contributed to 
the educational backwardness of a large 
number of social groups." 

27. Finally in para 13, the committee 
concludes with following observations:
"All this goes to prove that social 
backwardness is mainly based on racial, 
tribal, caste and denominational 
differences."
28. The validity of the impugned list of 
backward classes came up for consideration 
before this Court in Rajendran case and this is 
what this Court observed therein:
"The contention is that the list of 
socially and educationally backward 
classes for whom reservation is 
made under Rule 5 nothing but a 
list of certain castes. Therefore, 
reservation in favour of certain 
castes based only on caste 
considerations violates Article 15(1), 
which prohibits discrimination on 
the ground of caste only. Now if the 
reservation in question had been 
based only on caste and had not 
taken into account the social and 
educational backwardness of the 
justice in question, it would be 
violative of Article 15(1). But it must 
not be forgotten that a caste is also 
a class of citizens and if the caste as 
a whole is socially and educationally 
backward, reservation can be made 
in favour of such a caste on the 
ground that it is a socially and 
educationally backward class of 
citizens within the meaning of 
Article 15(4)."

29. Rajendran case is an authority for the 
proposition that the classification of backward 
classes on the basis of castes is within the 
purview of Article 15(4) if those castes are 
shown to be socially and educationally 
backward. No further material has been placed 
before us to show that the reservation for 
backward classes with which we are herein 
concerned is not in accordance with Article 
15(4). There is no gainsaying the fact that 
there are numerous castes in this country 
which are socially and educationally 
backward. To ignore their existence is to ignore 
the facts of life. Hence we are unable to uphold 
the contention that the impugned reservation 
is not in accordance with Article 15(4). But all 
the same the Government should not proceed 
on the basis that once a class is considered as 
a backward class it should continue to be 
backward class for all times. Such an 
approach would defeat the very purpose of the 
reservation because once a class reaches a 
stage of progress which some modern writers 
call as take off stage then competition is 
necessary for their future progress. The 
Government should always keep under review 
the question of reservation of seats and only 
the classes which are really socially and 
educationally backward should be allowed to 
have the benefit of reservation. Reservation of 
seats should not be allowed to become a vested 
interest. The fact that candidates of backward 
classes have secured about 50% of the seats in 
the general pool does show that the time has 
come for a de novo comprehensive examination 
of the question. It must be remembered that 
the Government's decision in this regard is 
open to judicial review." 

6.	State of A.P. v. U.S.V. Balram, (1972) 1 
SCC 660, at page 685  : 
"82In the determination of a class to be 
grouped as backward, a test solely based upon 
caste or community cannot be accepted as 
valid. But, in our opinion, though Directive 
Principles contained in Article 46 cannot be 
enforced by courts. Article 15(4) will have to be 
given effect to in order to assist the weaker 
sections of the citizens, as the State has been 
charged with such a duty. No doubt, we are 
aware that any provision made under this 
clause must be within the well defined limits 
and should not be on the basis of caste alone. 
But it should not also be missed that a caste is 
also a class of citizens and that a caste as 
such may be socially and educationally 
backward. If after collecting the necessary 
data, it is found that the caste as a whole is 
socially and educationally backward, in our 
opinion, the reservation made of such persons 
will have to be upheld notwithstanding the fact 
that a few individuals in that group may be 
both socially and educationally above the 
general average. There is no gainsaying the 
fact that there are numerous castes in the 
country, which are socially and educationally 
backward and therefore a suitable provision 
will have to be made by the State, as charged 
in Article 15(4) to safeguard their interest".

		xx			xx		xx

94. To conclude, though prima facie the list 
of Backward Classes which is under attack 
before us may be considered to be on the basis 
of caste, a closer examination will clearly show 
that it is only a description of the group 
following the particular occupations or 
professions, exhaustively referred to by the 
Commission. Even on the assumption that the 
list is based exclusively on caste, it is clear 
from the materials before the Commission and 
the reasons given by it in its report that the 
entire caste is socially and educationally 
backward and therefore their inclusion in the 
list of Backward Classes is warranted by 
Article 15(4). The groups mentioned therein 
have been included in the list of Backward 
Classes as they satisfy the various tests, which 
have been laid down by this Court for 
ascertaining the social and educational 
backwardness of a class."

7.	Janki Prasad Parimoo v. State of 
J&amp;K, (1973) 1 SCC 420, at page 432  : 
"22. Article 15(4) speaks about "socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens" 
while Article 16(4) speaks only of "any 
backward class citizens". However, it is now 
settled that the expression "backward class of 
citizens" in Article 16(4) means the same thing 
as the expression "any socially and 
educationally backward class of citizens" in 
Article 15(4). In order to qualify for being called 
a "backward class citizen" he must be a 
member of a socially and educationally 
backward class. It is social and educational 
backwardness of a class which is material for 
the purposes of both Articles 15(4) and 16(4)."

		xx		xx		xx
24. It is not merely the educational 
backwardness or the social backwardness 
which makes a class of citizens backward; the 
class identified as a class as above must be 
both educationally and socially backward. In 
India social and educational backwardness is 
further associated with economic 
backwardness and it is observed in Balaji case 
referred to above that backwardness, socially 
and educationally, is ultimately and primarily 
due to proverty. But if proverty is the exclusive 
test, a very large proportion of the population 
in India would have to be regarded as socially 
and educationally backward, and if 
reservations are made only on the ground of 
economic considerations, an untenable 
situation may arise. Even in sectors which are 
recognised as socially and educationally 
advanced there are large pockets of poverty. In 
this country except for a small percentage of 
the population the people are generally poor  
some being more poor, others less poor. 
Therefore, when a social investigator tries to 
identify socially and educationally backward 
classes, he may do it with confidence that they 
are bound to be poor. His chief concern is, 
therefore, to determine whether the class or 
group is socially and educationally backward. 
Though the two words "socially" and 
"educationally" are used cumulatively for the 
purpose of describing the backward class, one 
may find that if a class as a whole is 
educationally advanced it is generally also 
socially advanced because of the reformative 
effect of education on that class. The words 
"advanced" and "backward" are only relative 
terms  there being several layers or strata of 
classes, hovering between "advanced" and 
"backward", and the difficult task is which 
class can be recognised out of these several 
layers as been socially and educationally 
backward." 

25..Indeed all sectors in the rural areas 
deserve encouragement but whereas the 
former by their enthusiasm for education can 
get on without special treatment, the latter 
require to be goaded into the social stream by 
positive efforts by the State. That accounts for 
the raison-d'etre of the principle explained in 
Balaji case which pointed out that backward 
classes for whose improvement special 
provision was contemplated by Article 15(4) 
must be comparable to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes who are standing examples 
of backwardness socially and educationally. If 
those examples are steadily kept before the 
mind the difficulty in determining which other 
classes should be ranked as backward classes 
will be considerably eased."

8.	State of Kerala v. N.M. Thomas, (1976) 
2 SCC 310, at page 367  : 
"135. We may clear the clog of Article 16(2) 
as it stems from a confusion about caste in the 
terminology of scheduled castes and scheduled 
tribes. This latter expression has been defined 
in Articles 341 and 342. A bare reading brings 
out the quintessential concept that they (sic 
there) are no castes in the Hindu fold but an 
amalgam of castes, races, groups, tribes, 
communities or parts thereof found on 
investigation to be the lowliest and in need of 
massive State aid and notified as such by the 
President. To confuse this backwardmost 
social composition with castes is to commit a 
constitutional error, misled by a compendious 
appellation. So that, to protect harijans is not 
to prejudice any caste but to promote citizen 
solidarity. Article 16(2) is out of the way and to 
extend protective discrimination to this mixed 
bag of tribes, races, groups, communities and 
non-castes outside the four-fold Hindu division 
is not to compromise with the acceleration of 
castelessness enshrined in the sub-article. The 
discerning sense of the Indian Corpus Juris 
has generally regarded scheduled castes and 
scheduled tribes, not as caste but as a large 
backward group deserving of societal 
compassion..."

9.	State of U.P. v. Pradip Tandon, (1975) 
1 SCC 267, at page 273  : 
"14. Article 15(4) speaks of socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens. The 
State described the rural, hill and Uttrakhand 
areas as socially and educationally backward 
areas. The Constitution does not enable the 
State to bring socially and educationally 
backward areas within the protection of Article 
15(4). The Attorney-General however 
submitted that the affidavit evidence 
established the rural, hill and Uttrakhand 
areas to have socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens. The 
backwardness contemplated under Article 
15(4) is both social and educational. Article 
15(4) speaks of backwardness of classes of 
citizens. The accent is on classes of citizens. 
Article 15(4) also speaks of Scheduled Castes 
and Scheduled Tribes. Therefore, socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens in 
Article 15(4) could not be equated with castes. 
In M.R. Balaji v. State of Mysore and State of 
A.P. v. Sagar this Court held that classification 
of backwardness on the basis of castes would 
violate both Articles 15(1) and 15(4).

15. Broadly stated, neither caste nor race 
nor religion can be made the basis of 
classification for the purposes of determining 
social and educational backwardness within 
the meaning of Article 15(4). When Article 
15(1) forbids discrimination on grounds only of 
religion, race, caste, caste cannot be made one 
of the criteria for determining social and 
educational backwardness. If caste or religion 
is recognised as a criterion of social and 
educational backwardness Article 15(4) will 
stultify Article 15(1). It is true that Article 15(1) 
forbids discrimination only on the ground of 
religion, race, caste, but when a classification 
takes recourse to caste as one of the criteria in 
determining socially and educationally 
backward classes the expression "classes" in 
that case violates the rule of expressio unius 
est exclusio alterius. The socially and 
educationally backward classes of citizens are 
groups other than groups based on caste.

16. The expression "socially and 
educationally backward classes" in Article 
15(4) was explained in Balaji case to be 
comparable to Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. The reason is that the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes 
illustrated social and educational 
backwardness. It is difficult to define the 
expression "socially and educationally 
backward classes of citizens". The traditional 
unchanging occupations of citizens may 
contribute to social and educational 
backwardness. The place of habitation and its 
environment is also a determining factor in 
judging the social and educational 
backwardness.

17. The expression "classes of citizens" 
indicates a homogeneous section of the people 
who are grouped together because of certain 
likenesses and common traits and who are 
identifiable by some common attributes. The 
homogeneity of the class of citizens is social 
and educational backwardness. Neither caste 
nor religion nor place of birth will be the 
uniform element of common attributes to make 
them a class of citizens."

10.	K.S. Jayasree (Kumari) v. State of 
Kerala, (1976) 3 SCC 730, at page 733  : 
"13. Backward classes for whose 
improvement special provisions are 
contemplated by Article 15(4) are in the matter 
of their backwardness comparable to 
scheduled castes and scheduled tribes. This 
Court has emphasised in decisions that the 
backwardness under Article 15(4) must be 
both social and educational. In ascertaining 
social backwardness of a class of citizens, the 
caste of a citizen cannot be the sole or 
dominant test. Just as caste is not the sole or 
dominant test, similarly poverty is not the 
decisive and determining factor of social 
backwardness.
		xx		xx		xx		
21. In ascertaining social backwardness of a 
class of citizens it may not be irrelevant to 
consider the caste of the group of citizens. 
Caste cannot however be made the sole or 
dominant test. Social backwardness is in the 
ultimate analysis the result of poverty to a 
large extent. Social backwardness which 
results from poverty is likely to be aggravated 
by considerations of their caste. This shows 
the relevance of both caste and poverty in 
determining the backwardness of citizens. 
Poverty by itself is not the determining factor 
of social backwardness. Poverty is relevant in 
the context of social backwardness. The 
commission found that the lower income group 
constitutes socially and educationally 
backward classes. The basis of the reservation 
is not income but social and educational 
backwardness determined on the basis of 
relevant criteria. If any classification of 
backward classes of citizens is based solely on 
the caste of the citizen it will perpetuate the 
vice of caste system. Again, if the classification 
is based solely on poverty it will not be logical. 
The society is taking steps for uplift of the 
people. In such a task groups or classes who 
are socially and educationally backward are 
helped by the society. That is the philosophy of 
our Constitution. It is in this context that 
social backwardness which results from 
poverty is likely to be magnified by caste 
considerations. Occupations, place of 
habitation may also be relevant factors in 
determining who are socially and educationally 
backward classes. Social and economic 
considerations come into operation in solving 
the problem and evolving the proper criteria of 
determining which classes are socially and 
educationally backward. That is why our 
Constitution provided for special consideration 
of socially and educationally backward classes 
of citizens as also scheduled castes and tribes. 
It is only by directing the society and the State 
to offer them all facilities for social and 
educational uplift that the problem is solved. It 
is in that context that the commission in the 
present case found that income of the classes 
of citizens mentioned in Appendix VIII was a 
relevant factor in determining their social and 
educational backwardness." 

129.	  In Chitrelekha's case (supra) it was stated that the caste 
is the starting point. This is subject of course to the 
parameters that if the caste itself satisfies the test of 
backwardness which is implicit and inherent as noted in para 
782 of Indra Sawhney No.1 (supra). In that case caste becomes 
the relevant factor.  The view expressed in Chitralekha's case 
(supra) was not dissented from in Indra Sawhney No.1 (supra). 
In fact Justice Jeevan Reddy in the majority judgment in Indra 
Sawhney  No.1 (supra) referred to Chitrelekha's case (supra) at 
para 704. As noted above in para 782 of Indra Sawhney  No.1 
(supra) it has not been held that caste is class.  In the said 
paragraph it has been stated that individual survey is out of 
question since Article 16(4) speaks of class protection and not 
individual protection. In that context also it has been said  
that it does not mean that one can wind up the process of 
identification for the castes. It has also been emphasized in 
the said paragraph that having exhausted the castes or 
simultaneously with it, the authority may take up for 
consideration other occupational groups, communities and 
classes. If caste is a substitute for class, the question of any 
simultaneous consideration of others does not arise. 
Therefore, the Court observed that one may well begin with 
castes if one chooses and then go to other groups, sections 
and classes. If the Court meant to substitute the word caste 
with class the question of going to other classes would not 
arise. 
130.	  Reference may also be made to Akhil Bharatiya Soshit 
Karamchari Sangh (Railway) v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. 
(1981(1) SCC 246) where at para 22 it was noted as follows:
"This is not mere harmonious statutory 
construction of Article 16(1) and (4) but 
insightful perception of our constitutional 
culture, reflecting the current of resurgent 
India bent on making, out of a sick and 
stratified society of inequality and poverty, a 
brave new Bharat. If freedom, justice and 
equal opportunity to unfold one's own 
personality, belong alike to bhangi and 
brahmin, prince and pauper, if the panchama 
proletariat is to feel the social transformation 
Article 16(4) promises, the State must apply 
equalising techniques which will enlarge their 
opportunities and thereby progressively 
diminish the need for props. The success of 
State action under Article 16(4) consists in the 
speed with which result-oriented reservation 
withers away as, no longer a need, not in the 
everwidening and everlasting operation of an 
exception [Article 16(4)] as if it were a super-
fundamental right to continue backward all 
the time. To lend immortality to the reservation 
policy is to defeat its raison de'etre; to 
politicise this provision for communal support 
and Party ends is to subvert the solemn 
undertaking of Article16(1), to casteify 
'reservation' even beyond the dismal groups of 
backward-most people, euphemistically 
described as SC &amp; ST, is to run a grave 
constitutional risk. Caste, ipso facto, is not 
class in a secular State."

131.	  Much emphasis has been laid on the use of the word 
'only'. It is to be noted that while the respondents contend that 
where it is demonstrated that caste is not the only 
consideration the permissible provision will operate.  
Reference was made to Venkataraman's case (supra). As has 
been rightly contended by learned counsel for the petitioners 
the true effect of the word 'only' has been clarified in the 
decision itself. 

132.	    It is unnecessary to decide as it has been contended 
by learned counsel for the petitioners  whether the concept of 
strict scrutiny is a measure of judicial scrutiny as highlighted 
by the conditions in India. It is submitted that label  is not 
relevant. 

133.	  The ultimate object is the eradication of castes and that 
is the foundation for reservation. While considering the 
method adopted for eradication by adopting the process of 
reservation indirectly the facet of strict scrutiny comes in. The 
strict scrutiny test was applied in the background of Article 19 
vis-`-vis compelling State needs. The principle was recognized 
in Chintaman Rao v. The State of Madhya Pradesh (1950 SCR 
759). It was inter-alia quoted as follows:
 "The question for decision is whether the 
statute under the guise of protecting public 
interests arbitrarily interferes with private 
business and imposes unreasonable and 
unnecessarily restrictive regulations upon 
lawful occupation; in other words, whether the 
total prohibition of carrying on the business of 
manufacture of bidis within the agricultural 
season amounts to a reasonable restriction on 
the fundamental rights mentioned in article 19 
(1)(g) of the Constitution. Unless it is shown 
that there is a reasonable relation of the 
provisions of the Act to the purpose in view, 
the right of freedom of occupation and 
business cannot be curtailed by it. 
 	The phrase "reasonable restriction" 
connotes that the limitation imposed on a 
person in enjoyment of the right should not be 
arbitrary or of an excessive nature, beyond 
what is required in the interests of the public. 
The word "reasonable" implies intelligent care 
and deliberation, that is, the choice of a course 
which reason dictates. Legislation which 
arbitrarily or excessively invades the right 
cannot be said to contain the quality of 
reasonableness and unless it strikes a proper 
balance between the freedom guaranteed in 
Article 19(1)(g) and the social control permitted 
by clause (6) of Article19,  it must be held to be 
wanting in that quality".

134.	 Again in State of Madras v. V.G. Row (AIR 1952 SC 196) 
it was observed as follows:
 "13. Before proceeding to consider this 
question we think it right to point out, what is 
sometimes overlooked, that our Constitution 
contains express provisions for judicial review 
of legislation as to its conformity with the 
constitution unlike as in America where the 
Supreme Court has assumed extensive power 
of reviewing legislative acts under cover of the 
widely interpreted "due process" clause in the 
Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. If, then, 
the courts in this country face up to such 
important and none too easy task, it is not out 
of any desire to tilt at legislative authority in a 
crusader's spirit, but in discharge of a duty 
plainly laid upon them by the Constitution. 
This is especially true as regards the 
"fundamental rights" as to which this Court 
has been assigned the role of a sentinel on the 
qui vive. While the Court naturally attaches 
great weight to the legislative judgment, it 
cannot dessert its own duty to determine 
finally the constitutionality of an impugned 
statute. We have ventured on these obvious 
remarks because it appears to have been 
suggested in some quarters that the courts in 
the new set up are out to seek clashes with the 
legislatures in the country". 

135.	 At the outset, it may be pointed out that the stand of 
petitioners is that the primary consideration in selection of 
candidates for admission to the higher educational institutions  
must be merit.  The object of any rules, which may be made for 
regulating admissions to such institutions  therefore, must be 
to secure the best and most meritorious students. The 
national interest and the demand of universal excellence may 
even override the interests of the weaker sections. In this 
context, Krishna Iyer J aptly observed:

"To sympathise mawkishly with the weaker 
sections by selecting substandard candidates, 
is to punish society as a whole by denying the 
prospect of excellence, say, in hospital service. 
Even the poorest, when stricken by critical 
illness, needs the attention of super-skilled 
specialists not humdrum second rates".

136.	 Thus, the interest of no person, class or region can be 
higher than that of the nation. The philosophy and 
pragmatism of universal excellence through equality of 
opportunity for education and advancement across the nation 
is part of the constitutional creed. It is, therefore, the best and 
most meritorious students that must be selected for admission 
to technical institutions and medical colleges and no citizen 
can be regarded as outsider in the constitutional set-up 
without serious detriment to the `unity and integrity' of the 
nation. The Supreme Court has laid down that so far as 
admissions to post graduate course such as MS, MD and the 
like are concerned, it would be imminently desirable not to 
provide for any reservation based on residence or institutional 
preference.  However, a certain percentage of seats are allowed 
to be reserved on the ground of institutional preference. But 
even in this regard, so far as super specialties such as 
neurosurgery and cardiology are concerned there should be no 
reservation at all even on the basis of institutional preference 
and admissions should be granted purely on all-India basis. 
Further, classification made on the basis of super-specialties 
may serve the interests of the nation better, though interests 
of individual states may to a small extent, be affected.

137.	 The need of a region or institution cannot prevail at the 
highest scale of specialty where the best skill or talent must be 
hand-picked by selecting them according to capability. At the 
level of Ph.D., M.D. or levels of higher proficiency where 
international measure of talent is made, where losing one 
great scientist or technologist in the making is a national loss, 
the considerations we have expanded upon as important, lose 
their potency.
138.	  The inevitable conclusion is that the impugned Statute  
can be operative only after excluding the creamy layer from 
identifiable OBCs. There has to be periodic review of the 
classes who can be covered by the Statute. The periodicity 
should be five years. To strike constitutional balance there is 
need for making provision for suitable percentage for socially 
and economically backward classes in the 27% fixed.
I
139.	   To sum up, the conclusions are as follows:
(1)	For implementation of the impugned Statute 
creamy layer must be excluded.  
(2)	There must be periodic review as to the 
desirability of continuing operation of the 
Statute. This shall be done once in every five 
years. 
(3)	The Central Government shall examine as to 
the desirability of fixing a cut off marks in 
respect of the candidates belonging to the 
Other Backward Classes (OBCs).  By way of 
illustration it can be indicated that five marks 
grace can be extended to such candidates 
below the minimum eligibility marks fixed for 
general categories of students. This would 
ensure quality and merit would not suffer. If 
any seats remain  vacant after adopting such 
norms they shall be filled up by candidates 
from  general categories. 
(4)	So far as determination of backward classes 
is concerned, a Notification should be issued 
by the Union of India. This can be done only  
after exclusion of the creamy layer for which 
necessary data must be obtained by the 
Central Government from the State 
Governments and Union Territories.  Such  
Notification is open to challenge on the 
ground of wrongful exclusion or inclusion. 
Norms must be fixed keeping in view the 
peculiar features in different States and 
Union Territories.  
(5)	There has to be proper identification of Other 
Backward Classes (OBCs.).  For identifying 
backward classes, the Commission set up 
pursuant to the directions of this Court in 
Indra Sawhney No.1 has to work more 
effectively and not merely decide applications 
for inclusion or exclusion of castes. While 
determining backwardness, graduation (not 
technical graduation) or professional shall be 
the standard test yardstick for measuring 
backwardness.
(6)	To strike the constitutional balance it is 
necessary and desirable to ear-mark certain 
percentage of seats out of permissible limit of 
27% for socially and economically backward 
classes.
(7)	In the Constitution for the purposes of both 
Articles 15 and 16, caste is not synonyms 
with class and this is clear from the 
paragraphs 782 and 783 of Indra Sawhney 
No.1.  However, when creamy layer is 
excluded from the caste, the same becomes 
an identifiable class for the purpose of 
Articles 15 and 16.
(8)	Stress has to be on primary and secondary 
education so that proper foundation for 
higher education can be effectively laid. 
(9)	So far as the constitutional amendments are 
concerned:
	(i)	Articles 16(1) and 16(4) have to be 
harmoniously construed. The one is not 
an exception to the other.
	(ii)	Articles 15(4) and 15(5) operate in 
different fields. Article 15(5) does not 
render Article 15(4) inactive or  
inoperative. 
 (10)	While interpreting the constitutional 
provisions, foreign decisions do not have 
great determinative value. They may provide 
materials for deciding the question regarding 
constitutionality. In that sense, the strict 
scrutiny test is not applicable and indepth 
scrutiny has to be made to decide the 
constitutionality or otherwise, of a statute.
(11)	If material is shown to the Central 
Government that the Institution deserves to 
be included in the Schedule, the Central 
Government must take an appropriate 
decision on the basis of materials placed and 
on examining the concerned issues as to 
whether Institution deserves to be included in 
the Schedule.	
(12)	Challenge relating to private un-aided 
educational institutions has not been 
examined because no such institution has 
laid any challenge. It is to be noted that the 
petitioners have made submissions in the 
background of Article 19(6) of the 
Constitution. Since none of the affected 
institutions have made any challenge we do 
not propose to consider it necessary to 
express any opinion or decide on the 
question.  
140.	 	In view of the above-said conclusions, the writ 
petitions and the Contempt Petition (Civil) No.112/2007 in 
W.P. (C) No.265/2006 are disposed of.  

