
Supreme Court of India
North West Karnataka Road ... vs H.H.Pujar on 18 July, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4520 OF 2008
         (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.5120 of 2007)



North West Karnataka Road Transport
Corpn.                                         ...Appellant

                      Versus


H.H. Pujar                                     ...Respondent




                       JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.   Leave granted.

2.   Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division

Bench of the Karnataka High Court in the writ appeal

no.3830/2005 dismissing appeal against the order of learned

Single Judge in Writ Petition No.17519/2000. The writ appeal
was dismissed as not maintainable and, therefore, the

challenge in the present is essential to the order of learned

Single Judge.

3.   Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

     Respondent-Conductor was commissioning as such in

Bus No. F-16 on 15.9.1993 when the bus was intercepted by

the checking staff. It was found that the respondent had not

issued tickets to 20 out of 136 passengers.           Appellant

conducted   domestic   enquiry   which    found   him    guilty.

Consequently, he was dismissed from service vide order dated

3.4.1995. The same was challenged by the respondent before

the Labour Court invoking Section 10(4-A) of the Industrial

Disputes Act, 1947 (in short the 'Act'). The Labour Court held

that the domestic inquiry was fair and proper on the basis of

the memorandum filed by the respondent conceding to the

fairness of the domestic inquiry. However, the Labour Court

set aside the order of dismissal and directed reinstatement of

respondent with full back wages, continuity of service and

                             2
other consequential benefits. The basis for this order was non-

checking of cash bag of the respondent and non-examination

of ticketless passengers. The order was challenged before the

High Court.   By order dated 21.10.2005, the learned Single

Judge held that the order was correct so far as setting aside

dismissal order is concerned, direction for reinstatement and

continuity of service and consequential benefits. However, the

direction relating to back wages was set aside.       The writ

appeal as noted above, was dismissed on the ground that the

same was not maintainable.

4.   In support of the appeal learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that the primary reason indicated by the

Labour Court to hold that the order of dismissal was bad, was

the alleged non-examination of the passengers to whom the

respondent had not issued the tickets. It also did not find any

substance in the stand of the Corporation that earlier also on

12 occasions for similar charges punishments were awarded

but the respondent did not improve his conduct. The High

Court found that the conclusions of the Labour Court were

                             3
correct. It was noted that if more passengers were carried

within the permissible limit, it was fault of the Corporation

who did not took timely reformative and remedial measures.

5.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

view expressed by the High Court is clearly contrary to the law

laid down by this Court. Further, when the respondent himself

conceded to the fairness of the proceedings and the fact that

he had not issued tickets to twenty passengers, their non-

examination is of no consequences.

6.   There is no appearance on behalf of the respondent in

spite of service of notice.

7.   In State of Haryana and Anr. v. Rattan Singh (1977 (2)

SCC 491), it was, inter alia, held as follows:

           "4. It is well settled that in a domestic
           enquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of
           evidence under the Indian Evidence Act may
           not apply. All materials which are logically
           probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
           There is no allergy to hearsay evidence

                               4
provided it has reasonable nexus and
credibility. It is true that departmental
authorities and Administrative Tribunals must
be careful in evaluating such material and
should not glibly swallow what is strictly
speaking not relevant under the Indian
Evidence Act. For this proposition it is not
necessary to cite decisions nor text books,
although we have been taken through case-
law and other authorities by counsel on both
sides. The essence of a judicial approach is
objectivity, exclusion of extraneous materials
or considerations and observance of rules of
natural justice. Of course, fairplay is the basis
and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or
surrender of independence of judgment vitiate
the conclusions reached, such finding, even
though of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held
good. However, the courts below misdirected
themselves,     perhaps, in insisting that
passengers who had come in and gone out
should be chased and brought before the
tribunal before a valid finding could be
recorded. The `residuum' rule to which counsel
for the respondent referred, based upon
certain       passages      from        American
Jurisprudence does not go to that extent nor
does the passage from Halsbury insist on such
rigid requirement. The simple point is, was
there some evidence or was there no evidence
-- not in the sense of the technical rules
governing regular court proceedings but in a
fair   commonsense       way     as    men     of
understanding and worldly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in
proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is
beyond scrutiny. Absence of any evidence in
support of a finding is certainly available for
the court to look into because it amounts to an

                    5
         error of law apparent on the record. We find, in
         this case, that the evidence of Chamanlal,
         Inspector of the Flying Squad, is some
         evidence which has relevance to the charge
         levelled against the respondent. Therefore, we
         are unable to hold that the order is invalid on
         that ground.

         5.    Reliance was placed, as earlier stated, on
         the non-compliance with the departmental
         instruction that statements of passengers
         should be recorded by inspectors. These are
         instructions of prudence, not rules that bind
         or vitiate in the violation. In this case, the
         Inspector tried to get the statements but the
         passengers declined, the psychology of the
         latter    in   such    circumstances       being
         understandable, although may not be
         approved. We cannot hold that merely because
         statements of passengers were not recorded
         the order that followed was invalid. Likewise,
         the re-evaluation of the evidence on the
         strength of co-conductor's testimony is a
         matter not for the court but for the
         Administrative Tribunal. In con- clusion, we
         do not think the courts below were right in
         overturning the finding of the domestic
         tribunal."

8.   The view was reiterated in Divisional Controller KSRTC

(NWKSRTC) v. A.T. Mane (2004 (8) SCALE 308).

                            6
9.    As rightly contended by the appellant since fairness of

the proceedings was conceded and the respondent admitted

that he had not issued tickets to 20 passengers, their non-

examination is really of no consequence.

10.   In view of what has been stated by this Court in Rattan

Singh's case (supra) and in A.T. Mane's case (supra) award of

the Labour Court and impugned order of the High Court

cannot be maintained and are set aside. The order of

dismissal passed by the Corporation is to operate.

11.   The appeal is allowed without any order as to costs.

                                  ..........................................J.
                                  (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                  .........................................J.
                                  (P. SATHASIVAM)
New Delhi,
July 18, 2008




                              7

