
Supreme Court of India
Principal Secretary To Govt. Of ... vs N.Fairoz Khan &amp; Another on 19 February, 2008Bench: Ashok Bhan, J.M.Panchal
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  340 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Principal Secretary to Govt. of A.P.&amp; Anr

RESPONDENT:
N.Fairoz Khan &amp; Another

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 19/02/2008

BENCH:
ASHOK BHAN &amp; J.M.PANCHAL

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.340 OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.1273/2006)


	Leave granted.

	Bhathurusaman Sheik, the detenu and brother in law of respondent No.1, was 
arrested on 30th October, 2004 at the airport on the ground that he was indulging in 
the smuggling activities.  An order of detention was passed on 22nd November, 2004 
by the Principal Secretary to the Government of Andhra Pradesh in exercise of the 
powers conferred by Section 3 (1) of the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and 
Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974(as amended), (for short 'the Act') for a 
period of one year (the maximum period provided under the Act) from the date of 
passing of the said order.
	In a Habeas Corpus Petition filed by the brother in law of the detenu, the High 
Court, relying upon a judgment of this Court in the case of Rajesh Gulati v. 
Government of NCT of Delhi &amp; Another, reported in (2002) 7 SCC 129, has held that 
since the passport  of the detenu had been seized 
SLP(Crl.) 1273/06 .... Contd.
- 2 -
by the detaining authority, it is unlikely that the detenu  could carry on with the 
smuggling activities.  Accordingly, the High Court allowed the writ petition and 
quashed the detention order.  It is also not disputed by the counsel for the 
appellants that the detenu had already remained under detention for a period of 
nine and half months approximately out of the maximum period of one year, as 
provided under the Act.
	Respondent No.1 is not present despite service.

	Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and the judgment of this 
Court in the case of Rajesh Gulati (supra), we are of the opinion that a case for 
interference is not made out.  However, we make it clear that the impugned order of 
the High Court is confined to the facts of the present case and this shall not be taken 
as a precedent in future.
	The Appeal is dismissed accordingly.     

