
Supreme Court of India
Vijay Shankar Shinde &amp; Ors vs State Of Maharashtra on 15 January, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  95 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Vijay Shankar Shinde &amp; Ors.

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/01/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.3394 of 2006)

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.    Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment passed by a 
Division Bench of Bombay High Court, dismissing the appeal 
filed by the appellants who were convicted by learned 
Additional Sessions Judge, Satara, for offences punishable 
under Sections 302, 307, 452 read with Section 34 of the 
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short IPC).  For the first two 
offences each was sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life 
and to pay a fine with default stipulation.  For the offence 
relatable to Section 452 IPC, each was sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for one year and to pay a fine with default 
stipulation.

3.	Prosecution case which led to the trial of the appellants 
was as follows:

     There was family feud between the family of the accused 
and the family of the complainant who were close relations.  
Suits are filed and suits were pending.  On 10.10.1996, 
around 12.00 p.m. Dattatraya one of the injured persons was 
assaulted by the accused persons and on being stopped by 
mother-in-law of Dattatraya accused ran away.  Thereafter 
Tanaji (hereinafter referred to as deceased) came home and 
took Dattatraya by rickshaw towards hospital.  They were 
accosted at Gandhi Chowk by accused persons who broke the 
glass of rickshaw, turned down the rickshaw, pulled out the 
victims and assaulted them.  This assault was witnessed by 
Jayashri, wife of Tanaji.  She, therefore, filed a complaint 
before the police.  Investigation was started and on completion 
of investigation, the accused persons were charged of having 
committed murder of the deceased Tanaji and grievous hurt to 
Dattatraya.

4.	In order to establish its version prosecution examined 18 
witnesses. PWs. 11, 12 and 13 were stated to be eye-witnesses 
in addition to PW9 who also claimed to have witnessed a part 
of the incidence.

5.	The Trial Court accepted the prosecution version and 
held that the evidence of PWs. 11, 12 and 13 clearly establish 
the prosecution version. It was noted that PW 12 was injured 
in the incident.

6.	Before the High Court it was submitted that there were 
contradictions and omissions falsifying the prosecution 
version.  The High Court did not accept the version and 
upheld the conviction and maintained their sentence.
7.	In support of the appeal, leaned counsel for the 
appellants submitted that PWs 9 presence at the spot appears 
to be doubtful and in fact the Trial Court noted that she had 
not seen the actual incident but after learning about the 
occurrence she came to the place and her husband told her 
that it was the accused who had beaten him.  It is also 
submitted that PW11 had reason to falsely implicate the 
accused persons.  Learned counsel for the respondent-State 
on the other hand supported the judgment of the Trial Court 
as well as the High Court.        

8.	Though the Trial Court observed that PWs 9 and 11 may 
have tried to exaggerate because former was the widow and 
latter was injured victim, the evidence of PWs 12 and 13 
establish the prosecution version.
   9.	The Trial Court was not justified in holding that because 
PW11 was an injured witness he may have reason to falsely 
implicate the accused. However, as rightly observed by the 
Trial Court and the High Court, the evidence of PWs 12 and 13 
does not suffer from any deficiency.  PWs 11, 12 and 13 were 
cross-examined at length but nothing substantial could be 
elicited to destroy the credibility of their version.  As a matter 
of fact, the evidence of injured person who is examined as a 
witness lends more credence, because normally he would not 
falsely implicate a person thereby protecting the actual 
assailant.       		
10.	The Trial Court as well as the High Court have rightly 
placed reliance on the evidence of the eye-witnesses and as 
noted above their evidence was clear and cogent.  

11.	That being so, the impugned judgment of the High Court 
does not suffer from any infirmity to warrant interference.   
12.	The appeal fails and is dismissed.

