
Supreme Court of India
National Insurance Co. Ltd vs Vidhyadhar Mahariwala &amp; Ors on 17 September, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Harjit Singh Bedi
                                                   REPORTABLE


             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5721 OF 2008
         (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.13174 of 2007)



National Insurance Co. Ltd.                    .....Appellant

                              Versus


Vidhyadhar Mahariwala and Ors.                 ....Respondents



                       JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.   Leave granted.


2.   Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned

Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court at Jabalpur

dismissing the appeal filed by the appellant under Section 173

of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (in short the `Act'). Challenge
in the appeal was to the award made by the Motor Claims

Appellate Tribunal, Ratangarh (Churu) (in short `MACT) in

Claim Case No.89 of 2004. By the said award, a sum of

Rs.4,03,650/- was awarded to the claimant-respondent No.1

in the appeal. The dispute related to the rejection of

appellant's claim for exoneration on the ground of violation of

policy condition. It was pointed out that the driving license of

the driver of the offending vehicle was not in force on the date

of accident.


3.   Factual position in detail need not be indicated because

the issue relates to the liability of the insurance company as

the driving license was not valid on the date of the accident.



4.   In the instant case the date of accident was 11.6.2004.

The driver's license was initially valid for the period from

15.12.1997 to 14.12.2000 and thereafter from 29.12.2000 to

14.12.2003. Thereafter, it was again renewed from 16.5.2005

to 15.5.2008. The appellant filed its objections before MACT

taking the stand that since the driving license was not valid on

                                                             2
the date of accident it had no liability. The MACT turned down

the plea. According to it though on the date of accident the

driving license was not valid, since the driver's license was

renewed on 16.5.2005 for a further period of three years it

cannot be said that during the intervening period the driver

was incompetent or disqualified to driver the truck. With

reference to Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in

short the `Evidence Act') it was held that at the time of

accident driver was competent to drive the vehicle.



5.   In appeal by the impugned judgment the High Court

referred to three judgments of this Court in National

Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Swaran Singh and Ors. (2004 (3) SCC

297), National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Kusum Rai and Ors.

(2006 (4) SCC 250) and Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. v.

Nanjappan and Ors. (2004 (13) SCC 224) and came to hold

that the insurance company, the insurer was liable to

indemnify the award. It was held that merely there was a gap

in the renewal of driving license that cannot be a ground for

exoneration.

                                                          3
6.   In support of the appeal, placing reliance on the decision

of this Court in Ishwar Chandra and Ors. v. Oriental

Insurance Co. Ltd. and Ors. (2007 (10) SCC 650), it was

contended that the High Court's view is unsustainable.



7.   Learned counsel for respondent No.2 the owner of the

vehicle on the other hand supported the judgment of MACT.



8.   In   Swaran    Singh's   case   (supra)      whereupon   the

respondent no.2 relied, it was held as follows:


          "45. Thus, a person whose licence is
          ordinarily renewed in terms of the Motor
          Vehicles Act and the Rules framed thereunder,
          despite the fact that during the interregnum
          period, namely, when the accident took place
          and the date of expiry of the licence, he did not
          have a valid licence, he could during the
          prescribed period apply for renewal thereof
          and could obtain the same automatically
          without undergoing any further test or without
          having been declared unqualified therefor.
          Proviso appended to Section 14 in unequivocal
          terms states that the licence remains valid for
          a period of thirty days from the day of its
          expiry.
          46. Section 15 of the Act does not empower
          the authorities to reject an application for
          renewal only on the ground that there is a
          break in validity or tenure of the driving
          licence has lapsed, as in the meantime the
          provisions for disqualification of the driver


                                                              4
          contained in Sections 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and
          24 will not be attracted, would indisputably
          confer a right upon the person to get his
          driving licence renewed. In that view of the
          matter, he cannot be said to be delicensed and
          the same shall remain valid for a period of
          thirty days after its expiry."


9.   In Kusum Rai's case (supra) it was held as follows:




          14. This Court in Swaran Singh (2004 (3) SCC
          297) clearly laid down that the liability of the
          Insurance Company vis-`-vis the owner would
          depend upon several factors. The owner would
          be liable for payment of compensation in a
          case where the driver was not having a licence
          at all. It was the obligation on the part of
          the owner to take adequate care to see that the
          driver had an appropriate licence to drive the
          vehicle. The question as regards the liability of
          the owner vis-`-vis the driver being not
          possessed of a valid licence was considered in
          Swaran Singh stating: (SCC pp.      336-37,
          para 89)

               "89. Section 3 of the Act casts an
               obligation on a driver to hold an effective
               driving licence for the type of vehicle
               which he intends to drive. Section 10 of
               the Act enables the Central Government
               to prescribe forms of driving licences for
               various categories of vehicles mentioned
               in sub-section (2) of the said section. The
               various types of vehicles described for
               which a driver may obtain a licence for
               one or more of them are: (a) motorcycle
               without gear, (b) motorcycle with gear, (c)
               invalid carriage, (d) light motor vehicle,
               (e) transport vehicle, (f) road roller, and
               (g) motor vehicle of other specified
               description. The definition clause in
               Section 2 of the Act defines various
               categories of vehicles which are covered
               in broad types mentioned in sub-section
               (2) of Section 10. They are `goods


                                                              5
                carriage', `heavy goods vehicle', `heavy
                passenger       motor     vehicle',   `invalid
                carriage', `light motor vehicle', `maxi-cab',
                `medium        goods    vehicle',   `medium
                passenger motor vehicle', `motor-cab',
                `motorcycle', `omnibus', `private service
                vehicle', `semi-trailer', `tourist vehicle',
                `tractor', `trailer' and `transport vehicle'.
                In claims for compensation for accidents,
                various kinds of breaches with regard to
                the conditions of driving licences arise for
                consideration before the Tribunal as a
                person possessing a driving licence for
                `motorcycle without gear', [sic may be
                driving a vehicle] for which he has no
                licence. Cases may also arise where a
                holder of driving licence for `light motor
                vehicle' is found to be driving a `maxi-
                cab', `motor-cab' or `omnibus' for which
                he has no licence. In each case, on
                evidence led before the Tribunal, a
                decision has to be taken whether the fact
                of the driver possessing licence for one
                type of vehicle but found driving another
                type of vehicle, was the main or
                contributory cause of accident. If on
                facts, it is found that the accident was
                caused solely because of some other
                unforeseen or intervening causes like
                mechanical failures and similar other
                causes having no nexus              with the
                driver not possessing requisite type of
                licence, the insurer will not be allowed to
                avoid its liability merely for technical
                breach of conditions concerning driving
                licence."

10.   Nanjappan's case (supra) was referred to in Kusum Rai's

case (supra).


11.   In Ishwar Chandra's case (supra) the three decisions

referred to by the High Court were considered and it was held


                                                                 6
that the insurance company would have no liability in the

case of this nature. We are in agreement with the view. The

appeal deserves to be allowed which we direct. The impugned

order of the High Court is set aside. It is open to the claimant

to recover the amount from respondent No.2.



                                     ...................................J.
                                     (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                     ...................................J.
                                     (HARJIT SINGH BEDI)

New Delhi,
September 17, 2008




                                                                      7

