
Supreme Court of India
Mukhtiar Singh vs Harbinder Singh &amp; Ors on 6 August, 2008Author: ...........................J.
Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Aftab Alam
                                                                       1


          IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4930 OF 2008
         (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 18632 of 2006)


Mukhtiar Singh                              ....Appellant (s)

VERSUS

Harbinder Singh &amp; Ors.                                      ....
Respondent(s)


                          ORDER

1. Leave granted.

2.   This appeal is directed against an interlocutory order

     dated 21st of August, 2006 in RFA No. 1167 of 2005

     passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court at

     Chandigarh, whereby the High Court had vacated the

     stay initially granted in the appeal filed by the appellant

     and directed the appellant to deliver possession of the

     suit property to the respondent.        The appeal now

     pending before the High Court has arisen out of a suit

     for specific performance of a contract for sale.

                                                                1
                                                          2
3. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and

     after going through the impugned order and other

     materials on record, we are of the view that this appeal

     can be disposed of in the following manner:-

       i)    It is brought to our notice by the learned

             counsel for the parties that the decree for

             specific   performance    has   been   executed

             through Court. But possession of the same has

             not been delivered to the respondents, that is to

             say, the appellant is still in possession of the

             suit property.

       ii)   Such being the position, the parties are directed

             to maintain status quo as regards possession as

             of today, till the disposal of the pending appeal

             before the High Court.

4.     The High Court is requested to dispose of the appeal

within a period of six months from the date of supply of a

copy of this order positively, without granting any


                                                              2
                                                            3


unnecessary adjournment to either of the parties in

accordance with law.

5.    The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of to the extent

indicated above with no order as to costs.




                                  ............................J.
                                [TARUN CHATTERJEE]




                                    ...........................J.
                                    [AFTAB ALAM]
NEW DELHI

August 07, 2008.


                                                                3

