
Supreme Court of India
Julita Nirmal Chandra Nayak vs Nirmal Chandra Nayak on 15 April, 2008Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
           CASE NO.:
Transfer Petition (civil)  375 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Julita Nirmal Chandra Nayak

RESPONDENT:
Nirmal Chandra Nayak

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/04/2008

BENCH:
B.N. AGRAWAL &amp; G.S. SINGHVI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O  R  D  E  R

TRANSFER PETITION [CIVIL] NO.375 OF 2006


	Heard learned counsel for the parties.
	It has been stated that during the pendency of this petition, M.C. Case 
No.1072 of 2008, titled as Nirmal Chandra Nayak Vs. Julita Nirmal Chandra Nayak, 
has been filed before the Family Court, Bangalore, within the State of Karnataka, for 
granting a decree for divorce.  In the present transfer petition, a petition has been 
filed in which it has been stated that all the disputes between the parties have been 
settled; as such, a mutual consent divorce decree be granted in the aforesaid suit and 
criminal prosecution be quashed, apart from releasing the jewellery.  In view of this,  
M.C. Case No.1072 of 2008, titled as Nirmal Chandra Nayak Vs. Julita Nirmal 
Chandra Nayak, pending before the Family Court, Bangalore, within the State of 
Karnataka, is transferred to this Court and the same is, accordingly, disposed of in 
terms of the compromise, which shall form part of order of this Court.  
....2/-

- 2 -
	It is directed that criminal prosecution of the respondent in Case 
No.1229/PW/2005 arising out of F.I.R. (Cr.) No.143 of 2005, registered at Kalachowki 
Police Station, Mumbai, which is pending in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, 
15th Court at Muzgaon, Mumbai, within the State of Maharashtra, is hereby quashed 
and Application No.E-352 of 2005, pending before the Family Court, Bandra, 
Mumbai, within the State of Maharashtra, under Section 125 of the Indian Penal 
Code stands withdrawn.  It is directed that the jewellery and other items, which were 
seized by the police and are lying in the Court of Metropolitan Magistrate, 15th Court, 
Muzgaon, Mumbai, within the State of Maharashtra, are directed to be released in 
favour of the wife unconditionally.  Demand Draft for a sum of Rupees twelve lakhs 
by way of permanent alimony has been made over in Court by learned counsel 
appearing on behalf of the respondent to the learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the wife.
	The transfer petition is, accordingly, disposed of.

