
Supreme Court of India
Kerala State Electricity Board vs Chinnamma Antony on 15 July, 2008Author: . Arijit Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Harjit Singh Bedi
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

            CIVIL APPEAL No.             OF 2008
          (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 18788 of 2006)



The Kerala State Electricity Board              ...Appellant


                      Versus


Chinamma Antony                                   ...
Respondent



                       JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J


1.   Leave granted.

2.   Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned

Single Judge of the Kerala High Court dismissing the Civil

Revision Petition filed by the appellant-the Kerala State

Electricity Board (in short the `Board'). Challenge in the Civil
Revision was to the order passed by Learned Additional

District   Judge,   Thodupuzha,      granting   the     enhanced

compensation for alleged loss suffered by the respondent

(hereinafter referred to as the `claimant') on account of drawal

of electricity line over her property. The dispute related to the

compensation awarded for diminution in land value and the

grant of interest. Relying on a full Bench decision on a Kerala

High Court in Kumba Amma v. K.S.E.B. [2002 (1) KLT 542],

the High Court dismissed the Civil Revision Petition.

3.   In support of the appeal learned counsel for the

appellant-Board submitted that the High Court's judgment is

clearly unsustainable as the Full Bench decision in Kamba

Amma's case (supra) was set aside by this court in The Kerala

State Electricity Board v. Livisha etc. etc.[2007(6) SCC 792] by

the common judgment in Civil Appeal No. 289 of 2006 and

other Civil Appeals. This Court set aside the impugned order

in each case and remitted the matter back to the High Court

for a fresh consideration. It was inter-alia observed as follows:

                              2
   "10. The situs of the land, the distance
between the high voltage electricity line laid
thereover, the extent of the line thereon as also
the fact as to whether the high voltage line
passes over a small tract of land or through the
middle of the land and other similar relevant
factors in our opinion would be determinative.
The value of the land would also be a relevant
factor. The owner of the land furthermore, in a
given situation may lose his substantive right to
use the property for the purpose for which the
same was meant to be used.
   11. So far as the compensation in relation to
fruit-bearing trees are concerned the same would
also depend upon the facts and circumstances of
each case. We may, incidentally, refer to a recent
decision of this Court in Land Acquisition Officer
v. Kamadana Ramakrishna Rao (2007(3) SCC
526) wherein claim on yield basis has been held
to be relevant for determining the amount of
compensation      payable    under    the    Land
Acquisition Act; same principle has been
reiterated in Kapur Singh Mistri v. Financial
Commr. &amp; Revenue Secy. to Govt. of Punjab (1995
Supp(2) SCC 635), State of Haryana v. Gurcharan
Singh (1995 Supp(2) SCC 637), para 4 and
Airports Authority of India v. Satyagopal Roy
(2002(3) SCC 527). In Airports Authority's case
(supra) it was held: (SCC p.    533, para 14)
   "14. Hence, in our view, there was no reason
for the High Court not to follow the decision
rendered by this Court in Gurcharan Singh's case
(supra) and determine the compensation payable
to the respondents on the basis of the yield from
the trees by applying 8 years' multiplier. In this
view of the matter, in our view, the High Court
committed      error    apparent   in    awarding
compensation adopting the multiplier of 18."
   12. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the
High Court should consider the matter afresh on
the merit of each matter having regard to the fact
situation obtaining therein. The impugned
judgments, therefore, cannot be sustained. These
are set aside accordingly. The matters are
remitted to the High Court for consideration
thereon afresh. The appeals are allowed. In the


                      3
        facts and circumstances of the case, there shall
        be no order as to costs.

4.   There is no appearance on behalf of the respondent

though notice has been served.

5.   Following the view expressed by this Court in the

decision referred to above, and in The Kerala State Electricity

Board v. B. Sreekumari (2008 (5) SCC 398), we set aside the

impugned order of the High Court and remit the matter to it

for fresh consideration keeping in view the principles set out

in the decisions referred to above.

6.   The appeal is allowed without any order as to costs.

                                  .......................................J.
                                  (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)



                                  ......................................J.
                                  (H.S. BEDI)

                              4
New Delhi,
July 15, 2008




                5
6

