
Supreme Court of India
Sudheesh C.M. &amp; Ors vs Director Of Training, I.T.D.T. &amp; ... on 22 February, 2008Bench: Cji K.G. Balakrishnan, R.V. Raveendran, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1541-1544 of 2008

PETITIONER:
SUDHEESH C.M. &amp; ORS

RESPONDENT:
DIRECTOR OF TRAINING, I.T.D.T. &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/02/2008

BENCH:
CJI K.G. BALAKRISHNAN &amp; R.V. RAVEENDRAN &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CIVIL APPEAL NOS.1541-1544 OF 2008
(@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C.)NOS.25136-25139 OF 2005)

	Application for exemption from filing O.T. is granted. Leave granted.	Heard Learned 
Addl. Solicitor General and learned senior counsel for the appellants.
2.	The appellants herein had joined the Industrial Training Institute, Koilandy, an 
institution run by the Kerala State Government imparting vocational training, in the years 
1996 to 2002 and completed the I.T.I. Course in the trade of 'Fitter'.  Though the said institute 
was affiliated to the National Council for Vocational Training (NCVT), it was not affiliated 
in regard to the trade of 'Fitter' during those years.  
3.	In the prospectus issued by the Institute during the relevant years it was clearly 
represented as follows  : "Those who complete ITI courses with not less than 80%  of 
attendance shall be eligible for appearing for the All India Examination conducted by NCVT. 
Those who successfully pass in the examination shall be issued the National Trade 
Certificates".  

4.	The appellants joined the course in view of the said specific representation held out 
by the State Government that on successful completion of the course, they will be entitled to 
National Trade Certificates.  But when they completed the course, they were issued only 
provisional certificates, but were not issued the National Trade Certificates on the ground 
that the Institute was not affiliated in regard to the trade of Fitter.   They, therefore, filed writ 
petitions  and the High Court, by the impugned judgment, declined to grant relief as the 
NCVT had not recognised the course in regard to the trade of fitter.
5.	Similarly situated persons who had been denied the National Trade Certificates had 
earlier approached the Kerala High Court in O.P.No.11534/1996, O.P.No.12982/2003 and 
W.P.(C)No.35549/2003 and High Court  directed the issue of the certificates. Those 
decisions became final and were complied with.
6.	Learned Addl.Solicitor General submitted that having regard to the facts and 
circumstances of the case, in particular the State Government having mentioned in the 
prospectus that the students who successfully complete the course would be issued National 
Trade Certificates and the earlier decisions in similar cases having been complied with, the  
NCVT would give National Trade Certificates in these cases also having validity all over the 
country.   The National Trade 


certificates will have to be issued to all the appellants as also the proforma respondents who 
were writ petitioners, within three months.  To expedite the process, the appellants and the 
proforma respondents are also permitted to submit applications with all relevant records to 
NCVT and on receipt of such applications, NCVT shall issue certificates to the eligible 
candidates/applicants within the period as mentioned above.
		Appeals are disposed of accordingly.  No costs.

