
Supreme Court of India
Shiv Lal vs State Of Haryana on 18 January, 2008Bench: C.K. Thakker, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  137 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Shiv Lal

RESPONDENT:
State of Haryana

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/01/2008

BENCH:
C.K. THAKKER &amp; D.K. JAIN 

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

(Arising out of S.L.P.(Criminal) No.5062 of 2007

    	     Leave granted.

              We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
	The appellant herein was acquitted by the Trial Court  for an offence punishable 
under Section 307 IPC.  He, was, however, convicted for an offence punishable under 
Section 61(1)(a) of Punjab Excise Act, 1961 and was ordered to undergo  rigorous 
imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay a fine of Rs.1000/-,  in default of 
payment of fine, to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for two months. The High 
Court confirmed the said order of conviction.

	  The learned counsel for the appellant stated that so far as the conviction under 
Section 307, IPC is concerned, it was not challenged by the State and the order had 
attained finality.  So far as conviction under the Punjab Excise Act is concerned the 
counsel stated that the maximum punishment 




			:2:
imposable for the said offence is three years.  He also stated that the appellant had 
suffered serious injuries due to  air crash and even now his physical condition is not 
well and is undergoing treatment.  An affidavit to that effect is also filed.  Necessary 
material in the form of  photographs and medical certificate are also produced.  He 
further stated that the appellant has remained in jail for 159 days till today. 

	 On considering the facts and circumstances in their entirety, in our opinion, ends 
of justice would be met if we hold that the sentence suffered by the appellant is held 
adequate.  The appellant is ordered to be released forthwith if he is not required in 
connection with any other case.  We order accordingly.

	Appeal is, accordingly, allowed to the extent indicated above.

