
Supreme Court of India
Managing ... vs Mohan Babu Srivastava &amp; Ors on 18 February, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, V.S.Sirpurkar
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1576 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Managing Director,U.P.Co-operative Union Ltd. &amp; Anr.

RESPONDENT:
Mohan Babu Srivastava &amp; Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 18/02/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; V.S.SIRPURKAR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT                   
ORDER

CIVIL  APPEAL NO.1576 /2008
(@SLP(C) No.7917 /2006)

		Leave granted.
		Respondent was an employee of the appellant. He was transferred 
to Pilibhit by an order dated 16.10.1998. He did not join the said transferred post. He 
was placed under suspension by an order dated 16.11.1998. A departmental 
proceeding was initiated against him. A large number of charges including 
defalcation were framed in the departmental proceeding. Attempts after attempts 
were made to serve the charge-sheet on him i.e. on 2.2.2001, 7.3.2001, 19.4.2001 and 
28.8.2001. Even the contents of the said charge-sheet were published in the 
newspaper. He did not file any show-cause. The inquiry officer submitted a report 
thereafter. Again a second show-cause notice was issued on 18.8.2001. He even did not 
reply thereto.
		Respondent, however, filed a writ petition before the Allahabad 
High Court. The High Court by reason of the impugned judgment holding that the 
inquiry proceeding was vitiated in law as the inquiry officer did not apply his mind 
-1-


on the materials produced before him directed his reinstatement without back wages.
		Mr.Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant 
would submit that keeping in view the fact that the respondent had not appeared 
before the inquiry officer nor filed any show-cause, the impugned judgment cannot be 
sustained.
		Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondent, on the other hand would support the impugned judgment.
		The High Court, even if it was correct in its view on the merit of the 
matter, in our opinion, could not have directed  reinstatement of the respondent.
		Even if decisions in Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad and Ors. 
Vs. B. Karunakar &amp; Ors. - (1993) 4 SCC 727 and in U.P. State Co-operative Land 
Development Bank Ltd. Vs. Chandra Bhan Dubey and Ors.-  1991 1 SCC 741 were to 
be applied, the order of reinstatement could not have been passed.		
		Mr. Jain, learned counsel relies on a decision of this Court in 
Deputy Registrar Coop. Societies and Other Vs.Bunni Lal Chaurasia - 2005 11 SCC 
570, where principles of natural justice were held to be not applicable having regard 
to the fact that despite service of notice, the respondent did not appear. The said 
decision is not applicable in the instant case as from a perusal of the report submitted 
by the 
-2-


inquiry officer it is evident that he had proceeded solely on the basis that as no reply 
has been filed by the delinquent officer, the charges must be held to have been proved.
	A distinction exits between a case where the delinquent officer admits his 
guilt and a case where he absents himself in the proceeding. In the latter event, even if 
he is proceeded against ex-parte evidence has to be led as the enquiry officer is 
required to apply his mind on the materials brought on record.
	In his report the inquiry officer has not referred to any document placed 
before him. Who produced the said document is not known. How the said documents 
could be used against the respondent was not deliberated upon. 
	In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the interest of justice 
would be subserved if the matter is remitted to the inquiry officer to hold a denovo 
enquiry against the respondent. However, keeping in view the  conduct of the 
respondent in so far as he had been avoiding the disciplinary proceeding from 1998 
till date as also in view of the report,we direct that the  respondent shall  not be 
entitled to any subsistence allowance for the said period.
 	Respondent shall report before the Managing Director of the appellant on 
29.3.2008. The Disciplinary Authority  shall immediately appoint another inquiry 
officer. Inquiry proceeding as against the respondent may be completed as 
expeditiously as possible.
-3-
		The appeal is allowed to the aforementioned extent and with the 
aforementioned directions and observations.

