
Supreme Court of India
T.A. Hameed vs M. Viswanathan on 21 February, 2008Bench: A.K.Mathur, Altamas Kabir
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  8422 of 2001

PETITIONER:
T.A. Hameed

RESPONDENT:
M. Viswanathan

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/02/2008

BENCH:
A.K.MATHUR &amp; ALTAMAS KABIR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1817 OF 2004
P.M. Sukumaran &amp; Anr.            ... Appellants
Versus
Puthiya Kuttimappilakath Shalima ... Respondent


C.A. No. 8422/2001
1.	Heard learned counsel for the parties.  Learned counsel for the parties submit 
that the parties have compromised the matter and, therefore, the present appeal has 
become infructuous.
2.	The appeal is dismissed as having become infructuous.  No order as to costs.
C.A. No. 1817/2004
3.	This appeal by special leave is directed against the judgment and order dated 
31.1.2003 passed by the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in CRP No. 234/1997 
whereby the learned Full Bench has answered the question referred to it by the Division 
Bench and while answering the question referred to it, the Full Bench itself decided the 
case on merits.  The grievance of the appellant herein is that in view of the law laid down 
by this Court in the case of Kesho Nath Khurana Vs. Union of India and Others 1981 
(Supp) SCC 38 and Kerala State Science &amp; Technology Museum Vs. Rambal Co. and 
Others (2006) 6 SCC 258, the Full Bench should not have gone on the merits of the 
matter and the Full Bench should have after answering the reference remitted the matter 
back to the Division Bench for deciding the Civil Revision Petition.  
4.	The brief facts necessary for disposal of the present appeal are that a Reference 
was made by the Division Bench of the High Court of Kearala, which reads as under :-
"Are the legal heirs of a deceased tenant entitled to the protection of 
Section 11(17) of the Kerala Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) 
Act?"		
5.	This Reference was answered by the Full Bench in para 18 of the impugned 
order in the following words,
"the benefits under Section 11(17) to the legal heirs/tenants cannot 
be accepted as laying down the correct law."
In para 19 of the impugned order the learned Full Bench asked counsel for both the 
parties to advance arguments on merits also as the proceedings were initiated about a 
decade back and asked counsel for the parties for disposing of the revision petition itself 
and accordingly arguments were heard on merits of the Revision Petition also and 
Revision Petition was disposed of by dismissing the same and directing the appellant-
tenant to surrender possession within six months and directing the appellant to file an 
affidavit of undertaking to that effect.  
6.	Aggrieved against the said order dated 31.1.2003 of the Full Bench, the present 
appeal by special leave has been filed before this Court.
7.	We have heard learned counsel for the parties.  The principal submission of the 
learned counsel for the appellant is that the Full Bench should not have disposed of the 
revision petition on merits.  He further submitted that once the Court directed the 
counsels for the parties to make submission on merits, they had no option but to address 
the Court on merits of the matter.  He, however, submitted that in view of the law laid 
down by this Court in the cases of Kesho Nath (supra) and Kerala State Science (supra) 
the Full Bench should not have decided the revision petition on merits and after 
answering the reference made to it by the Division Bench, it should have remitted the 
revision petition to the Division Bench for decision in accordance with law.  The 
submission of learned counsel for the appellant appears to be correct.  
8.	In the case of Kesho Nath (supra), in almost identical situation, this Court  has 
taken the view that when a reference is made to a larger Bench, the  larger Bench should 
answer the reference and thereafter remit the case to the appropriate Bench for decision 
on merits.  In that case also the learned Single Judge had referred the matter to the 
Division Bench on the question "whether the order dated January 21, 1963 made by the 
Settlement commissioner was final and binding in the present appeal, and if so, what is its 
effect upon the point in controversy in the present appeal?" The Division Bench by order 
dated April 7, 1980 disposed of the appeal on merits and dismissed it with costs and held 
that the order dated January 21, 1963 made by the Chief Settlement commissioner was 
not final and binding in the civil proceedings and it did not exclude the jurisdiction of the 
civil court to decide whether there was any encroachment by the respondent on the 
property conveyed to the appellant under the sale certificate dated June 7, 1963 read with 
the corrigendum dated September 22, 1964 issued by the District Rent and Managing 
Officer, Simla, pursuant to the auction sale held on September 25, 1955.
9.	This Court held that it is obvious that since only the aforesaid question of law was 
referred by the single Judge to the Division Bench, the Division Bench should have sent 
the matter back to the Single Judge after deciding the question of law referred to them.  
But instead the Division Bench proceeded to dispose of the second appeal on merits and 
dismissed it with costs.  This Court further observed that, "We think that the Division 
Bench was in error in following this procedure.  The Division Bench ought to have sent 
the appeal back to the single Judge with the answer rendered by them to the question 
referred by the single Judge and left it to the single Judge to dispose of the second appeal 
according to law."
10.	Same view was reiterated by this Court in the case of Kerala State Science 
(supra).  In that case this Court after referring to earlier decisions in para 8 held as under 
:-
"It is fairly well settled that when reference is made on a specific 
issue either by a learned Single Judge or Division Bench to a larger 
Bench, i.e., Division Bench or Full Bench or Constitution Bench, as 
the case may be, the larger bench cannot adjudicate upon an issue 
which is not the question referred to."
 11.	In the case at hand also, almost an identical situation had taken place that a 
reference was made by the learned Division Bench of the Kerala High Court to the Full 
Bench and the Full Bench after answering the reference went on to decide the revision 
petition itself on merits, which the Full Bench had no jurisdiction to do as the revision 
petition was not referred to the Full Bench for decision.  Since, only reference was made 
to the Full Bench, the Full Bench should have answered the question referred to it and 
remitted the matter to the Division Bench  for deciding the revision petition on merits.  
Consequently, we set aside that part of the impugned order dated 31.1.2003 whereby the 
Full Bench has dismissed the revision petition filed by the appellant herein.  We make it 
clear that we are not expressing any opinion with regard to the issue which was referred 
by the Division Bench to the Full Bench.  We are only examining the matter whether the 
Full Bench could have disposed of the revision petition itself or not.   In these 
circumstances, we allow this appeal to the extent that the order of the Full Bench 
deciding the civil revision petition filed by the appellant herein was decided on merits by 
the Full Bench was not correct.  The revision petition filed by the appellant shall stand 
revived and be placed for hearing before a Division Bench, which shall dispose of the 
same in accordance with law after hearing both the parties.  Since the matter is old, we 
request the Division Bench to dispose of the revision petition expeditiously.
12.	The appeal is allowed to the extent indicted hereinabove.  No order as to costs.

