
Supreme Court of India
Dilbagh Singh vs State Of Punjab on 27 May, 2008Author: L S Panta
Bench: S. B. Sinha, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  477 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Dilbagh Singh

RESPONDENT:
State of Punjab

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/05/2008

BENCH:
S. B. Sinha &amp; Lokeshwar Singh Panta

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
Reportable


Lokeshwar Singh Panta, J.

1.	The appellant has filed this appeal under Section 19 of 
the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 
against the final judgment and order dated 26.02.2007 passed 
by the Additional Judge, Designated Court, Maximum Security 
Jail, Nabha (Punjab) in Sessions Case No. 2 of 15.04.2004 
whereby and whereunder the Designated Court convicted and 
sentenced the appellant for offences punishable under Section 
302/382 of the Indian Penal Code [for short the IPC] and 
Section 5 of the Terrorists and Disruptive Activities 
(Prevention) Act, 1987 [for short TADA].
2.	Briefly stated, the case of the prosecution is that on 
9.5.1992, Kirandeep Singh- the complainant (P.W. 7), son of 
Balkar Singh (P.W. 4), went to Inspector Swaran Singh, the 
Station House Officer (P.W. 15) who along with other police 
personnel was on patrol duty at Atalan bus stand and 
reported that he is a resident of village Atalan, P.S. Ghagga, 
District Patiala.  They are four brothers, and two of his elder 
brothers are residing at Ludhiana, whereas he along with his 
third brother Jagmail Singh - the deceased and father Balkar 
Singh (P.W. 4) are residing in  village Atalan and are engaged 
in the occupation of farming.  It was his case that due to 
terrorism activities in the area, the Government has provided 
two rifles, one .303 bore and other 7.62 bore with cartridges to 
their family for self-protection and security.  On 9.5.1992, at 
about 7:00 p.m. he and his brother  Jagmail Singh were 
returning to their house from the fields carrying the said arms 
(complainant was armed with .303 and his brother armed with 
7.62 bore).   Dilbagh Singh, the accused-appellant along with 
Jasbir Singh and one more tall young man armed with fire 
arms suddenly appeared before them near the chowk of their 
house.  Dilbagh Singh and Jasbir Singh are the residents of 
the same village.  They both opened fire on Jagmail Singh who 
on receipt of fire arm injuries fell down on the ground.  
Thereafter, third accomplice, picked up the rifle of Jagmail 
Singh and shot at Jagmail Singh who died on the spot.  The 
complainant took shelter by the side of a water channel and 
started firing in the air to scare the accused.  The accused 
after sometime stopped firing.  The complainant rushed to the 
place where Jagmail Singh was lying dead and his 7.62 bore 
rifle was taken by the accused. 

3.	Balkar Singh (P.W. 4) had witnessed the entire incident 
from his house.  He rushed to the scene of occurrence.  
According to the complainant, the motive behind the murder 
was that before joining the main stream of the society his 
brother Jagmail Singh  the deceased used to participate in 
the extremist activities with the accused.  The deceased later 
on abandoned the extremist activities and got married.  The 
accused still wanted the deceased to join their extremist 
activities, but since he refused to do so, the accused killed him 
on the count.  

4.	The complainant asked his father, Balkar Singh (P.W. 4) 
to guard the body of Jagmail Singh and himself went to P.S. 
Ghagga to lodge a report of the incident of murder to the police 
but he met the SHO on the way where his statement (Ex.P1) 
was recorded.  The SHO endorsed Ex. P1 to the incharge of the 
Police Station for registration of the case, on the basis of which 
FIR No. 27 (Ex. P2) dated 09.05.1992 came to be registered for 
offences punishable under Sections 302/384 read with 
Section 34 IPC and Section 5 of TADA and Section 25 of the 
Arms Act.  Inspector Swaran Singh (P.W. 15) rushed to the 
place of occurrence and inspected the spot and informed his 
superior officers and Army Officers requesting them to reach 
at the spot.  He prepared the inquest report (Ex. PA) on the 
body of the deceased which was identified by Joginder Singh 
(P.W. 2) and ASI Jarnail Singh (P.W. 17), residents of the same 
village.  On 10.5.1992, the body of the deceased was sent to 
Civil Hospital, Samana, with inquest and an application (Ex. 
PL) for conducting the post-mortem examination through 
police C. Ram Dia 1041 and C. Karnail Singh 2250.  
5.	On inspection of the spot, the Investigation Officer took 
into possession: (i) blood-stained earth vide recovery memo 
(Ex. PB); (ii) two empty cartridges of 7.62 bore vide recovery    
memo (Ex. PC); (iii) 20 empty cartridges of AK-47 rifle near the 
dead body vide recovery memo (Ex. PD); and (iv) 7 empty 
cartridges of .303 bore near from the dead body vide recovery 
memo (Ex. PE).  All the articles were packed and sealed with 
seal SS in the presence of Mohinder Singh (P.W. 3).  A rough 
site plan of the place of occurrence was prepared and marked 
Ex. PM.  Statements of witnesses were recorded.  All recovered 
articles were later on deposited with MHC Balwinder Singh 
(P.W. 12) at P.S. Ghagga.  
6.	On 10.5.1992 at 10:00 a.m., post mortem examination on 
the body of the deceased was conducted by Dr. Satish Arora 
(P.W. 5) who in his report (Ex.PF) reported that the cause of 
death of Jagmail Singh was gun shot injuries to brain and 
right lung resulting in his death which were sufficient to cause 
death in the ordinary course of nature.  All the injuries were 
ante-mortem in nature. 
7.	The accused Dilbagh Singh @ Bagha was arrested on 
17.9.1999 by Inspector Budh Ram (P.W. 14) who conducted 
the personal search of the accused and prepared personal 
search memo and disclosed the grounds of arrest to the 
accused vide separate memo.  Blood-stained earth (Ex. PB) 
was sent to the Chemical Examiner whereas empty cartridges 
(Exs. PC, PD &amp; PE) were sent to Forensic Science Laboratory, 
Chandigarh, Punjab.  On receipt of the report of the Chemical 
Examiner and after completion of investigation, charge sheet 
was prepared and filed against accused Dilbagh Singh under 
Sections 302/382/34 IPC, Section 25 of the Arms Act and 
Section 5 of TADA.  The accused pleaded not guilty to the 
charges and claimed to be tried. 
8.	The prosecution in support of its case examined as many 
as 18 witnesses namely,:  Dalip Singh (P.W. 1) was a witness 
of extra-judicial confession allegedly made by accused Dilbagh 
Singh, but he did not support the prosecution case;  Joginder 
Singh (P.W. 2) identified the dead body of Jagmail Singh, 
Mohinder Singh (P.W. 3) resident of the village in whose 
presence the empty catridges and blood stained earth were 
taken into police possession  from the spot by the Investigating 
Officer, proved the recovery memos in this regard Exs. PC, PD 
and PE.  Balkar Singh (P.W. 4), father of the deceased is an 
eye witness of the occurrence; Dr. Satish Arora (P.W. 5), 
Medical Officer, who conducted the post mortem on the dead 
body of Jagmail Singh; MHC Manmohan Singh (P.W. 6) 
produced the original FIR register of this case; Kirandeep 
Singh (P.W. 7) the informant is the brother of the deceased; C. 
Tejinder Singh (P.W. 8) took the sealed parcels of catridges to 
the Forensic Science  Laboratory, Chandigarh, Punjab; HC 
Kuldeep Singh (P.W. 9) proved the death of co-accused Jasbir 
Singh in police encounter and FIR No. 41 dated 29.5.1992 in 
this regard stood registered at P.S. Patran; SI Harminder 
Singh (P.W. 10) partly investigated this case; C. Hardam Singh 
(P.W. 11)  took the parcels of the blood stained earth and 
blood stained clothes of the deceased and deposited the same 
in the office of Chemical Examiner, Patiala and MHC 
Balwinder Singh (P.W. 12) with whom the case property was 
deposited in the Malkhana by the Investigating Officer,  P.W. 
12 also proved that one rifle bearing No. 1050 with 50 live 
catridges along with other rifle of 7.62 bore and 25 catridges 
were issued to the complainant party for their security.  ASI 
Grudev Singh (P.W. 13) also partly investigated this case 
proved the death of co-accused Jasbir Singh @ Pappu and 
Bawa Singh (the third co-accused with the appellant) in police 
encounter in some other case, Budh Ram (P.W. 14) (since 
retired) Inspector of Police arrested accused Dilbagh Singh @ 
Bagha on 17.9.1999 and proved his personal search memo 
and the grounds of arrest memo; Inspector Swaran Singh 
(P.W. 15), Investigating Officer of this case proved the 
investigation part of this case; Balbir Singh (P.W. 16)  proved 
the report of the Chemical Examiner Exs PW16/A; Jarnail 
Singh (P.W. 17) the then Ahlmad in the court of Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class and Pardeep Kumar (P.W. 18), In-
charge, FSL, Chandigarh, Punjab stated that the empty 
catridges could not be examined as the weapons were not 
recovered in this case.  

9.	The accused in his statement recorded under Section 313 
Cr.P.C. denied the prosecution case and pleaded innocence.   
He stated that the deceased was a terrorist and was killed by 
the Police in an encounter and that he has been falsely 
implicated in this case by the Police to save its own skin.  
Three defence witnesses namely, SI Harminder Singh (D.W. 1), 
Darshan Singh (D.W. 2) and Amar Singh (D.W. 3) all residents 
of village Atalan were examined.  The trial court, on 
appreciation of the oral and documentary evidence found the 
accused guilty of the offences punishable under Section 
302/382 IPC and Section 5 of TADA and, accordingly, 
convicted and imposed the following sentences upon him 
which shall run concurrently:-
OffenceS
IMPRISONMENT
Fine 
(Rs.)
in default oF payMENT 
OF FINE 
U/S. 302 IPC
Imprisonment 
for life
5,000/-
RI for 3 months
U/S. 382 IPC
5 Years R.I.
2,000/-
RI 1 month
U/S. 5 TADA
5 years R.I.
2,000/-
RI 1 month
      
10.	Aggrieved by and dissatisfied with the said judgment and 
order dated 26.02.2007 passed by the Additional Judge, 
Designated Court, Maximum Security Jail, Nabha, the 
appellant has filed this statutory appeal before this Court. 

11.	We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with 
their assistance, we have examined the judgment of the trial 
court and re-apprised the entire oral and documentary 
evidence  placed on record.

12.	Mr. Sarup Singh, learned senior counsel appearing for 
the appellant, assailed the judgment of the trial court, inter 
alia, contending: (i) that the presence of Kirandeep Singh  
complainant (P.W. 7) at the place of occurrence of the incident 
along with the deceased is highly doubtful because the 
informant did not try to save his brother and the fact that the 
accused persons who allegedly were fully armed would have 
spared the complainant especially when he himself was having 
a .303 bore rifle cannot be accepted; (ii) that even the conduct 
of Balkar Singh (P.W. 4)  father of the deceased was not 
natural as he too did not make any attempt to save his son 
from attack allegedly made by the accused; (iii) that as the 
trial court has not convicted the appellant for charged offence 
under Section 25 of the Arms Act which technically would 
amount to acquittal for the said offence, therefore, on the 
same set of evidence conviction of the appellant for offences 
under Section 302/382 IPC and Section 5 of TADA by using 
the same weapons is not sustainable; (iv) that the alleged 
incident had occurred at about 7:00 p.m. at the chowk of the 
village, it is unbelievable that no independent witness from the 
village has been examined by the prosecution to corroborate 
the testimony of P.Ws. 4 and 7 who are highly interested 
witnesses; and (v) that the evidence of defence witnesses has 
wrongly been ignored by the learned trial court who have 
proved on record that the deceased was murdered by the 
police in an encounter and the complainant at the instance of 
the Police has implicated the appellant in a false case because 
of enmity.

13.	Mr. Ajay Pal, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the respondent-State on the other hand submitted that the 
reasons given by the trial court for recording the order of 
conviction of the appellant are based upon proper appreciation 
of the evidence led by the prosecution in the case.  He then 
submitted that merely because P.Ws. 4 and 7, the two eye  
witnesses are relatives of the deceased, their testimony  
cannot be disbelieved and discarded on this premise only as 
their evidence is cogent, consistent and unblemished with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the appellant and this Court should 
be slow to interfere in the well-reasoned and well-merited 
judgment of the trial court. 
14.	We have given our anxious and thoughtful consideration 
to the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the 
parties.  The arguments put forward by Mr. Sarup Singh 
although are very attractive yet we find ourselves unable to 
agree with the same.

15.	On independent scrutiny of the entire evidence produced 
on record, more particularly the testimony of eyewitnesses 
namely, Balkar Singh (P.W. 4) - father and informant 
Kirandeep Singh (P.W. 7) brother respectively of the deceased, 
it stands fully proved that on 9.5.1992, around 7:00 p.m., 
P.W. 7 and the deceased were returning to their house after 
doing routine agricultural pursuits in the fields.  Dilbagh 
Singh the appellant along with Jasbir Singh and one more 
unknown accomplice armed with fire arms suddenly came and 
stood in front of them near the chowk located near their house 
and opened fire at Jagmail Singh and shot him dead.  The 
unknown accomplice picked up 7.62 bore rifle of Jagmail 
Singh and started firing shots at the body of Jagmail Singh - 
the deceased.   P.W. 7 took shelter behind the cover 
surrounding the water channel and opened fire in the air to 
scare the accused and after a short while the accused stopped 
firing and fled away from the place of occurrence.  P. W. 7 
rushed to the spot where his brother was lying dead and his 
rifle was found missing.  Both these witnesses deposed with 
one voice that it was the appellant accompanied by Jasbir 
Singh a resident of their village and one more unknown 
accomplice who murdered the deceased and the motive behind 
the  killing of Jagmail Singh was that he was a member of 
extremist activities with the appellant, but later on  the 
deceased joined the main stream of the society and left 
extremist activities which offended Dilbagh Singh who wanted 
the participation of Jagmail Singh in the extremist activities 
but the deceased refused to rejoin their gang.  The deceased 
after joining the main stream of the society also got married.  
The evidence of the eye witnesses could not be shattered by 
the prosecution and their evidence has been found 
trustworthy, reliable and free from any doubt.  

16.	Dr. Satish Arora (P.W. 5), conducted the post-mortem 
examination on the body of the deceased Jagmail Singh and 
found the following injuries:-
(1)	Gun-shot injury:
(a)	Wound of entry  .6cm x .6cm over 
the right temporal region above the 
pinna.  Margins inverted, blackened, 
collar of abrasion present around the 
wound.

(b)	Wound of exit  10cm x 10cm on the 
left front temporal region, margins 
averted.  Multiple fractures skull 
bones and brain matter coming out of 
the wound.
(2)	
(a)	Wound of entry - .6cm x .6cm on the 
right scapular region.

(b)	Wound of exit  2.5cm x 2.5cm on the 
front aspect in its upper 1/3rd.
	(3)	
(a)	Wound of entry - .6cm x .6cm on the 
right mid thoracic region.

(b)	Wound of exit  2.5cm x 2.5cm on the 
front of chest in its lower 1/3rd.

     (4)	
(a)	Wound of entry - .6cm x .6cm on the 
right leg in its lower 1/3rd. 

(b)	Wound of exit  8cm x 8cm on the back of 
right leg in its upper 1/3rd.

As deposed before the court that there were multiple fractures 
of skull bone, brain matter was badly damaged; there was 
haemothorax on right side; the abdomen of the deceased was 
healthy, stomach was containing semi-digested food material 
and, in his opinion, the cause of death of Jagmail Singh was 
gun shot injuries to brain and right lung, which were sufficient 
to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.  All the 
injuries were ante-mortem.

17.	MHC Kuldip Singh (P.W. 9) of Police Station Patran and 
ASI Gurdev Singh (P.W. 13), have proved on record that Jasbir 
Singh and Bawa Singh, accomplices of Dilbagh Singh were 
killed in police encounter in regard to another case FIR No. 41 
dated 29.5.1992 registered against them under Section 307, 
148, 149 IPC, Section 25 Arms Act and Section 5 of TADA at 
P.S. Patran, whereas Dilbagh Singh was arrested in this case 
on 17.7.1999 by Budh Ram(P.W. 14).

 18.	The deposition of MHC Balwinder Singh (P.W. 12) 
Incharge of the Malkhana of P.S. Ghagga would prove that as 
per the report of P.S. Ghagga, i.e. DDR No. 10 dated 5.4.1992 
one rifle .303 bore bearing no. 1050 with 50 live cartridges 
was supplied to Balkar Singh (P.W. 4) and another rifle of 7.62 
bore having butt No. 476 with 25 cartridges was entrusted to 
Kirandeep Singh ((P.W. 7), under the BDS Scheme for the 
protection of their personal life and property and safety of the 
life of other members of the family from the attack of the 
terrorists who had been extending threats to them.  He 
deposed that on 9.5.1992 rifle 7.62 bore having butt No. 476 
was said to have been snatched by the terrorists from the 
possession of the deceased and that the entire case property 
was deposited by Inspector Swaran Singh (P.W. 15)  - SHO 
P.S. Ghagga, with him with seals intact and the same were 
sent to the office of the Chemical Examiner through Constable 
Hardam Singh (P.W. 15), whereas the parcels of empty 
cartridges were sent by him to the Forensic Science 
Laboratory, Chandigarh, Punjab, but the same could not be 
got compared as the fire arms used for commission of the 
crime could not be recovered from the accused.  It is his 
evidence that so long as the parcels remained in his 
possession, he neither tampered with them nor allowed any 
other person to tamper with the same. 

19.	On independent scrutiny of the evidence of P.Ws. 4 and 7 
we find that they are the truthful witnesses who have 
helplessly witnessed the crime from the close range but could 
not help the deceased because of the sudden attack on him by 
the accused who were three in number with deadly fire arms. 
P.W. 7 fortunately protected himself by taking shelter by the 
side of the water channel as he could not take proper position 
and target the assailants with his fire arm and he could only 
succeed in firing shots in the air so that he could protect 
himself and when he looked at his brother the assailants had 
already done their job.  P.W. 4 at the relevant time was about 
65 years of age and was unarmed while standing on the 
terrace of his house which fact itself was enough to prove that 
he could not target the assailants to save his son from their 
brutal attack.  It was but natural that under such fearful and 
dangerous circumstances it could not be expected from people 
of ordinary prudence such as P.Ws. 4 and 7 that they could 
encounter with the terrorists who had come with pre-
meditated plan to take revenge with the deceased who turned 
down their command of not joining the terrorist activities in 
the areas of operation.  We do not notice material 
contradiction in the ocular and medical evidence appearing on 
record. The evidence of P.W. 4 and P.W. 7 finds corroboration 
from the post mortem report (Ex. PF) of the deceased which 
proves that the assailants had used deadly fire arms and as 
many as four direct gun shot injuries were inflicted on the 
body of the deceased which resulted in 8 injuries of the 
wounds having entry and exit of the gun shots.  Added to it, 
there were also multiple fractures of skull bone of the 
deceased and brain matter was badly damaged as deposed by 
Dr. Satish Arora (P.W. 5).  
20.	 We have gone through the statements of D.Ws. 1, 2 and 
3 who have admitted in the cross-examination that they did 
not know how Jagmail Singh died.  They have not seen the 
occurrence nor were they present at the time of occurrence at 
the spot.  They stated that there was some murmuring in the 
village that Police might have killed deceased Jagmail Singh.  
Further, these witnesses have never reported to the Police or 
higher authorities that they have heard that Jagmail Singh 
was killed by Police authorities or that the accused has been 
falsely implicated in this case.  They have deposed in the court 
in favour of the appellant for the first time in the year 2007 
whereas the murder of Jagmail Singh was committed on 
9.5.1992 in front of the home of P.W. 4 in the same village to 
which the defence witnesses do belong.  The trial court has 
rightly come to the conclusion that the evidence of defence 
witnesses was of no help and assistance to the appellant to 
prove that he has been falsely implicated by P.Ws. 4 and 7 in 
the case on hand. 
20.	Having given our careful consideration to the above-
stated submissions made by the learned counsel for the 
parties and in the light of the evidence discussed above, it 
must be held that the evaluation of the findings recorded by 
the trial court do not suffer from manifest error and improper 
appreciation of evidence on record warranting any interference 
in this appeal.	
21.	In the result, for the afore-stated reasons, we find that 
there is no merit in the appeal and it is, accordingly, 
dismissed.

