
Supreme Court of India
Abdul Ghaffar &amp; Anr. Etc vs State Of Bihar on 4 April, 2008Author: P Naolekar
Bench: S.B. Sinha, P.P. Naolekar
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  603 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Abdul Ghaffar &amp; Anr. etc

RESPONDENT:
State of Bihar

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/04/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; P.P. NAOLEKAR

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
NON-REPORTABLE


CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 603 OF 2008
[arising out of Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.479 of 2007]


P.P. NAOLEKAR,J.

1.		Leave granted.		
2.		On 12.12.2005, an FIR was registered at Turkaulia P.S., 
District East Champaran, Bihar on the basis of a complaint lodged by 
Vinay Kumar Sharma.   As per the said FIR, at about 1 o'clock in the 
afternoon he along with his brothers and nephew Ajay Sharma 
reached the land which belongs to his family.   After some time, the 
accused-appellants, namely, Abdul Gaffar, Abdul Khair, Banaras Rai 
with other accused persons named in the FIR along with 150 people 
reached the fields where the complainant party was present, with arms 
and ammunition. Manan Dewan and Alauddin Dewan ordered their 
men to kill the complainant and his family members.  On this, Azhar 
Sah fired with a country-made pistol, which struck on the head of the 
complainant.  Then Abdul Gaffar, Abdul Khair and Banaras Rai gave 
beatings to Ajay Sharma, nephew of the complainant with an iron rod 
and a lathi, which ultimately resulted in his succumbing to the injuries 
sustained by him.  The FIR further alleged the participation of Abdul 
Khair of having caused injury to Loknath Sharma, brother of the 
complainant, with an iron rod. 
3.		As per the appellants, they are the owners of the lands 
measuring 75 bighas in village Chilrawan, District East Champaran, 
Bihar, as these lands were part of the land settled by Betia Raj with 
the ancestors of the appellants and they had mortgaged the property in 
the year 1915.  After the period of 60 years,  under the Bihar Money 
Lenders Act, the said lands would revert back to the appellants and 
their family members.  It is a bone of contention of the appellants that 
on the relevant date they were in possession of the property and it was 
the complainant party which had tried to take forcible possession over 
the land and that is how the incident took place in which five 
members of the appellants' family were shot dead and several others, 
namely, Alauddin, Mohd. Siraj, Banaras Rai, Zainuddin Sah, Abdul 
Ghaffar and Narayan Roy were badly injured by use of firearms.   The 
appellants contend that they had informed the police on 12.12.2005 
itself that the Sharma brothers including the District Judge who is one 
of the brothers had planned to take over possession of the property 
and had threatened to kill the appellants like birds.
4.		It is contended by the learned counsel for the appellants 
that the appellants have been falsely implicated as the other party was 
the attackers and in the process of their attack five persons  died and a 
number of other persons were seriously injured.
5.		On a plain reading of the FIR which was lodged on the 
same day, i.e. on 12.12.2005, it is apparent that the accused-appellants 
were named as the persons who had caused serious injuries to Ajay 
Sharma, nephew of the complainant, who later on succumbed to  
injuries.  When the appellants have been named in the FIR which was 
lodged immediately after the incident, at this stage we do not find any 
infirmity in the impugned order of the High Court and that of the 
Sessions Court whereunder the accused-appellants were not released 
on bail.
6.		For the aforesaid reasons, we do not find any merit in the 
appeal.  It is, accordingly, dismissed.

