
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India And Anr vs Babu Lal Yadav on 21 February, 2008Bench: A.K.Mathur, Altamas Kabir
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1467 of 2008

PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA AND ANR

RESPONDENT:
BABU LAL YADAV

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/02/2008

BENCH:
A.K.MATHUR &amp; ALTAMAS KABIR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

    CIVIL APPEAL  NO.1467 OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP(C) No.9330 of 2006)

	
	We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
	Delay condoned.
	Leave granted.
	This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 11th November, 
2005 in D.B.Civil Special Appeal (W) No. 290 of 2003 passed by the Division 
Bench of the High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur whereby the Division Bench has 
affirmed the order of the learned Single Judge.  Learned Single Judge has 
reduced the punishment of dismissal from service to the stoppage of six grade 
increments with future effect.  Learned Single Judge further directed that 50% of 
back wages be also paid  from the date of filing of the writ petition.
	The facts of the case are that the respondent herein was appointed as 
Constable in the Border Security 


			-2-
Force on 13th June, 1975.  Thereafter he was promoted from time to time.  He 
remained absent for a long time.  Therefore, a notice was issued to him but he did 
not respond and ultimately, he was removed from service.  This removal was 
challenged by the respondent (herein)  and the learned Single Judge having regard 
to the facts and circumstances of the case modified the order of removal from 
service to the withholding of six grade increments with future effect and awarded 
50% of backwages.  
	Aggrieved against this order, the Union of India filed a Letters Patent 
Appeal before the Division Bench.  The Division Bench affirmed the order of the 
learned Single Judge.  The Division Bench observed that the appellant herein was 
aware that the respondent was not keeping well and was also aware about the 
extension of his leave on medical ground from time to time.  Having regard to this 
consideration, the Division Bench affirmed the order of the learned Single  Judge.
	Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and that the 
litigation is going on from a very long time and the respondent is almost on the 
verge of retirement,   we are not inclined to interfere in this appeal.  However, we 
modify the order of the Division 


			-3-
Bench to the extent that the respondent will not get the benefit of payment of 
50% backwages from the date of filing of the writ petition as this misery has been 
invited by respondent himself.
	Be that as it may, we are not interfering in this appeal, but we modify the 
order of the Division Bench to the extent that the punishment recorded by the 
learned Single Judge and affirmed by the Division Bench of the stoppage of six 
grade increments with future effect is maintained but he will not be entitled to any 
benefit of backwages whatsoever.  This is because of the fact that the incumbent is 
almost reaching at the age of superannuation.  Therefore, looking to these facts, 
we affirm the order of the Division Bench with the modification that he will not be 
entitled to any benefit of backwages.  However, this will not affect the retiral 
benefits of the respondent.
	The appeal is accordingly, disposed of.
	The stay order passed by this Court on 11th May, 2006 is vacated.

