
Supreme Court of India
M.M.T.C. Ltd vs M/S. H.J. Baker &amp; Bros. Inc on 27 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1301 of 2002

PETITIONER:
M.M.T.C. LTD

RESPONDENT:
M/S. H.J. BAKER &amp; BROS. INC

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 27/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

WITH 
C.A.NO.1290/2002

	Heard the parties.

	We propose to dispose of these appeals by a short order.  Therefore, the facts 
leading to the filing of these appeals may not be recited.

	The award was made on 3/2/1996 by three arbitrators.  The award was filed before 
the learned single Judge for making it the rule of the court.  The appellant filed 
objections under Section 30 and 33 of the Arbitration Act, 1940(hereinafter 'the Act', 
for short) taking various grounds.  It appears that the learned single Judge by a 
lengthy judgment rejected the objections filed by the appellant and by the same order 
the award was made the rule of the court.  Aggrieved thereby, the appellant preferred 
an appeal before the Division Bench.
......2.

- 2 -

	In the appeal memo, the appellant has taken as many as 32 grounds as to why the 
award made by the arbitrators be not set aside as the same has been improperly 
procured or is otherwise invalid.  The learned Division Bench, after hearing the counsel 
on both the sides, disposed of the appeal, the relevant portion of which reads as under:-
	"We are of the view that the approach adopted by 
the learned Single Judge while considering the objections to 
the award is in consonance with the principles laid down by 
Supreme Court.  Parties have chosen the forum of their 
choice.  Scope of interference by the Court is limited one and 
Learned Single Judge was perfectly justified in saying that 
no ground was made out to interfere with the award."

A reading of the relevant portion of the judgment clearly shows that none of the 
grounds raised by the appellant in the appeal memo has been considered.  By now, it is 
well settled principles of law that the courts are to consider and answer all the issues 
raised before it.  This has not been done in the present case.

	The order of the Division Bench is, therefore, unsustainable in law.  The  order  
dated  21/11/2001 passed in 
.....3.

- 3 -

FAO(OS)477/01 is hereby set aside.  FAO(OS)477/01 is restored to the file of the High 
Court.  As the award has been made as far back on 3/2/1996, we request the High 
Court to dispose of the appeal within three months from today after considering all the 
issues raised in the appeal memo.

	Appeals are disposed of in the above terms.  No costs.

