
Supreme Court of India
Z. Ajeesudeen vs Union Of India &amp; Ors on 12 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1256 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Z. AJEESUDEEN

RESPONDENT:
UNION OF INDIA &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1256 OF 2008
[Arising out of SLP(C) No.22049/2005]

	Leave granted. 

	Heard learned counsel for the parties.

	By an order dated 30/9/1993, the appellant was appointed as Assistant Engineer 
purely on adhoc basis and as a stopgap arrangement w.e.f. 1/10/1993.  Subsequently, his 
service was regularised w.e.f. 21/6/1997.  His grievance is that his seniority as Assistant 
Engineer was not counted w.e.f. 1/10/1993.  In other words, he prayed that his seniority 
as Assistant Engineer should be counted from 1/10/1993, the date from which he was 
appointed on adhoc basis.  In this connection, learned counsel for the appellant referred 
to a decision of this Court rendered in T. Vijayan &amp; Ors. Vs. Divisional Railway 
Manager &amp; Ors., (2000) 4 SCC 20.   While referring to an earlier judgment of this Court 
rendered in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers Association Vs. State of 
Maharashtra &amp; Ors., (1990) 2 SCC 715, it was held 
........2.

- 2 -

that once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to the relevant rule, his seniority 
has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his 
regularisation. This Court further pointed out that the corollary of the above rule is that 
where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a 
stopgap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for 
considering the seniority.

	Learned counsel for the appellant strongly relied on the direction (B) which reads as 
under:-
	(B)  If the initial appointment is not made by 
following the procedure laid down by the rules but the 
appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the 
regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the 
period of officiating service will be counted."

We regret, we cannot agree with the learned counsel.  The decision in T. Vijayan's case 
(supra) was by a two-Judge Bench of this Court, but a somewhat different view has been 
taken in a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in M.K. Shanmugam Vs. Union of 
India, (2004) 4 SCC 476 in para 8 of which it was observed -- "It is only in those cases 
where initially they had been recruited even though they have been appointed ad hoc the  
recruitment was subject to  the  same  process  as it had 
.....3.

- 3 -

been done in the case of regular appointment and that the same was not a stopgap 
arrangement."  Thus, all adhoc service prior to regular appointment cannot be counted 
for seniority, etc.  It counts only where the initial adhoc appointment is made by the 
same process as is applicable to regular appointment. 

	In the case at hand, the initial appointment of the appellant is, as already noted, 
purely on adhoc basis and that too not in accordance with the rules for regular 
appointment.  The consistent view taken by this Court is that even if an appointment is 
made on adhoc basis by following procedure according to the rules for regular selection, 
the   period   of   such  adhoc  appointment could be counted.  However, if the adhoc 
appointment, as in the case at hand, is made purely on adhoc basis without following the 
procedure prescribed under the rules for regular appointment such period spent as 
adhoc appointee cannot be counted.  This is the law settled by M.K. Shanmugam's case 
(supra).

	Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there is a rule for adhoc 
appointment, and the appellant was appointed under that rule. Hence, he submitted that 
his adhoc service be counted.  We regret we cannot agree.  In our opinion, for adhoc 
service to be counted it is not enough that there is a rule  permitting  adhoc   
appointment.   It is also 
......4.

- 4 -

necessary that the appointment was made after following the procedure prescribed for 
making a regular appointment.  Only then will the adhoc service be counted, otherwise it 
will not.

	In view thereof, there is no merit in this appeal.  It is, accordingly, dismissed.

