
Supreme Court of India
Virsa Singh &amp; Ors vs State Of Punjab on 26 August, 2008Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, Harjit Singh Bedi
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                       CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.205 OF 2008


Virsa Singh and Ors.                           ...Appellant(s)


                                      Versus


State of Punjab                                          ...Respondent(s)




                                   O R D E R

          Heard learned counsel for the parties.
          Four appellants, along with accused Balwinder Singh and Sucha Singh,
were tried and while the aforesaid two person were acquitted by the Trial Court,
Appellant No.1-Virsa Singh and Appellant No.4-Balkar Singh along with one Avtar
Singh were convicted under Section 307 read with Section 149 of the Indian Penal
Code [for short, `I.P.C.'] and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of four years and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/-; in default to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of two months. They were also convicted under Section
325 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
a period of two years and to pay fine of Rs.250/-; in default, to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of one month each. They were further convicted under
Section 148 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
one year. Appellant No.2-Darshan Singh was convicted
                                                                              ....2/-
                                          -2-
under Section 307 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of four years and to pay fine of Rs.1000/-; in default to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of three months. He was further convicted under Section
326 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and sentenced to under rigorous imprisonment for a
period of two and half years and to pay fine of Rs.500/-; in default, to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of two months. He was also convicted under Section 325
read with Section 149 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of two years and to pay fine of Rs.250/-; in default; to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of one month. This appellant was then convicted under
Section 148 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of
one year. Appellant No.3-Bakshish Singh was convicted under Section 307 read with
Section 149 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for a period of four years
and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/-; in default; to undergo further imprisonment for a
period of three months. He was further convicted under Section 326 I.P.C. and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two and half years and to
pay fine of Rs.500/-; in default, to undergo further imprisonment for a period of two
months. He was also convicted under Section 325 read with Section 149 I.P.C. and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay fine
of Rs.250/-; in default, to undergo further imprisonment for a period of one month.
He was lastly convicted under Section 148 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a period of one year. The sentences, however, were ordered to run
concurrently. On appeal being preferred by the accused persons, High Court
                                                                                   ....3/-
                                           -3-
confirmed the convictions and sentences. So far as Avtar Singh is concerned, he did
not prefer any appeal.     This appeal by the special leave has been filed by the
remaining four persons whose convictions have been confirmed by the High Court.
           The prosecution case has been supported by P.Ws 4,5 and 6 (Bakshish,
Mann Singh and Sohan Singh respectively), out of whom P.W.4 is the informant
himself. All the three eye-witnesses are injured persons.           We have been taken
through the evidence of these witnesses. Having perused the evidence of these
witnesses, we are of the view that the High Court as well as he Trial Court were quite
justified in placing reliance upon their evidence especially when their evidence is
corroborated by medical evidence. In our view, the High Court was quite justified in
upholding convictions of the appellants.
           Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants submitted that they
have remained in custody for a period of more than one year. In the facts and
circumstances of the present case, we are of the view that the ends of justice would be
met in case the sentences of imprisonment awarded against the appellants are reduced
to the period already undergone.
           Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in-part and while upholding the
convictions of the appellants, sentences of imprisonment awarded against them are
reduced to the period already undergone by them. The appellants are directed to be
released forthwith, if not required in connection with any other case.
                                                                           ......................J.
                                                 [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                    ......................J.
                                                 [HARJIT SINGH BEDI]
New Delhi,
September 09, 2008.

