
Supreme Court of India
C.B.I,New Delhi vs Roshan Lal Saini on 21 July, 2008Author: D A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Harjit Singh Bedi
                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

           CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

          CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.                 OF 2008
         (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) No. 3194 of 2007)


Central Bureau of Investigation,
New Delhi                                             ...
Appellant

                              Vs.


Roshan Lal Saini                                 ...Respondent



                       JUDGMENT

DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.   Leave granted.

2.   Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a

learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court directing that the

conviction of the respondent shall remain stayed during the

pendency of Criminal Appeal No. 809 of 2005




                                                            1
3.   Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

     Respondent who was working as Patwari Halqa and was

convicted by learned Special Judge, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi,

for offences punishable under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) read

with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988

(in short `P.C. Act') and Section 120-B of the Indian Penal

Code, 1860 (in short `IPC') and sentenced to undergo rigorous

imprisonment for a period of one year, 2 years and one year

respectivley and to pay a fine of Rs.2000/- with default

stipulation. Against the judgment in question respondent filed

the aforesaid Criminal appeal which was admitted.        After

admission of the appeal, respondent filed an application in

terms of Section 389(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure,

1973 (in short the `Code') read with Section 482 of the Code

for suspension of the judgment of learned Special Judge.

     The High Court by order dated 10.8.2006 stayed the

conviction. According to the appellant, the view expressed by

this Court in K.C. Sareen v. CBI, Chandigarh [2001(6) SCC


                                                           2
584] was not kept in view.     The High Court dismissed that

application.

4.   It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that

the suspension of the conviction is clearly unsustainable. It is

pointed out that the High Court noted that the employer had

given a notice for dispensing his services as Peon.

5.   Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the

High Court took note of the fact that this was a case where the

prayer for suspension of the conviction was to be granted.

Unless the order of conviction was suspended, the respondent

would have lost his job.

6.   In State of Maharashtra v. Gajanan and Another [2003

(12) SCC 432], it was noted as follows:

            "Having perused the impugned order as also
         the judgment of this Court in K.C. Sareen's case
         [2001(6) SCC 584] we find the High Court had
         no room for distinguishing the law laid down by
         this Court in K.C. Sareen case supra even on
         facts. This Court in the said case held: (SCC
         p. 589, para 11)



                                                            3
       "11. The legal position, therefore, is
    this: though the power to suspend an
    order of conviction, apart from the order
    of sentence, is not alien to Section 389(1)
    of the Code, its exercise should be limited
    to very exceptional cases. Merely because
    the convicted person files an appeal in
    challenge of the conviction the court should
    not suspend the operation of the order of
    conviction. The court has a duty to look at
    all aspects including the ramifications of
    keeping such conviction in abeyance. It is
    in the light of the above legal position
    that we have to examine the question as
    to what should be the position when a
    public servant is convicted of an offence
    under the PC Act. No doubt when the
    appellate court admits the appeal filed in
    challenge of the conviction and sentence
    for the offence under the PC Act, the
    superior court should normally suspend
    the sentence of imprisonment until
    disposal of the appeal, because refusal
    thereof would render the very appeal
    otiose unless such appeal could be heard
    soon after the filing of the appeal. But
    suspension of conviction of the offence
    under the PC Act, dehors the sentence of
    imprisonment as a sequel thereto, is a
    different matter."
                       (emphasis supplied)

   In the said judgment of K.C. Sareen's case
(supra) this Court has held that it is only in very
exceptional cases that the court should exercise
such power of stay in matters arising out of the
Act. The High Court has in the impugned order
nowhere pointed out what is the exceptional
fact which in its opinion required it to stay the
conviction. The High Court also failed to note
the direction of this Court that it has a duty to
look at all aspects including ramification of
keeping such conviction in abeyance. The High
Court, in our opinion, has not taken into
consideration any of the above factors while
staying the conviction. It should also be noted
that the view expressed by this Court in K.C.
Sareen case (supra) was subsequently approved



                                                      4
         followed by the judgment of this Court in Union
         of India v. Atar Singh [2003(12) SCC 434].

7.   In Union of India v. Avtar Singh &amp; Anr. (2003(12) SCC

434) it was held as follows:

          "This appeal is directed against the impugned
          order of the High Court. The respondent-
          accused, who has been convicted under
          Section 409 IPC and Section 13 OF THE
          Prevention of Corruption Act, preferred an
          appeal to the High Court, which has been
          entertained. On an application being filed
          under Section 389 of the Code of Criminal
          Procedure, the High Court has suspended the
          conviction solely on the ground that the non-
          suspension of conviction may entail removal of
          the delinquent government servant from
          service."

8.   In K.C. Sareen's case (supra) it was noted as follows:

              "11. The legal position, therefore, is this:
          though the power to suspend an order of
          conviction, apart from the order of sentence, is
          not alien to Section 389(1) of the Code, its
          exercise should be limited to very exceptional
          cases. Merely because the convicted person
          files an appeal in challenge of the conviction
          the court should not suspend the operation of
          the order of conviction. The court has a duty
          to look at all aspects including the
          ramifications of keeping such conviction in
          abeyance. It is in the light of the above legal
          position that we have to examine the question
          as to what should be the position when a
          public servant is convicted of an offence under
          the PC Act. No doubt when the appellate court

                                                              5
admits the appeal filed in challenge of the
conviction and sentence for the offence under
the PC Act, the superior court should normally
suspend the sentence of imprisonment until
disposal of the appeal, because refusal thereof
would render the very appeal otiose unless
such appeal could be heard soon after the
filing of the appeal. But suspension of
conviction of the offence under the PC Act,
dehors the sentence of imprisonment as a
sequel thereto, is a different matter.
12. Corruption by public servants has now
reached a monstrous dimension in India. Its
tentacles have started grappling even the
institutions created for the protection of the
republic.    Unless      those   tentacles    are
intercepted and impeded from gripping the
normal and orderly functioning of the public
offices, through strong legislative, executive as
well as judicial exercises the corrupt public
servants could even paralyse the functioning
of such institutions and thereby hinder the
democratic polity. Proliferation of corrupt
public servants could garner momentum to
cripple the social order if such men are
allowed to continue to manage and operate
public institutions. When a public servant is
found guilty of corruption after a judicial
adjudicatory process conducted by a court of
law, judiciousness demands that he should be
treated as corrupt until he is exonerated by a
superior court. The mere fact that an appellate
or revisional forum has decided to entertain
his challenge and to go into the issues and
findings made against such public servants
once again should not even temporarily
absolve him from such findings. If such a
public servant becomes entitled to hold public
office and to continue to do official acts until
he is judicially absolved from such findings by
reason of suspension of the order of
conviction, it is public interest which suffers
and sometimes, even irreparably. When a
public servant who is convicted of corruption
is allowed to continue to hold public office, it
would impair the morale of the other persons
manning such office, and consequently that
would erode the already shrunk confidence of
the people in such public institutions besides
demoralising the other honest public servants
who would either be the colleagues or
subordinates of the convicted person. If honest
public servants are compelled to take orders
from proclaimed corrupt officers on account of

                                                    6
           the suspension of the conviction, the fallout
           would be one of shaking the system itself.
           Hence it is necessary that the court should not
           aid the public servant who stands convicted
           for corruption charges to hold only (sic) public
           office until he is exonerated after conducting a
           judicial adjudication at the appellate or
           revisional level. It is a different matter if a
           corrupt public officer could continue to hold
           such public office even without the help of a
           court order suspending the conviction.

           13.    The above policy can be acknowledged
           as necessary for the efficacy and proper
           functioning of public offices. If so, the legal
           position can be laid down that when conviction
           is on a corruption charge against a public
           servant the appellate court or the revisional
           court should not suspend the order of
           conviction during the pendency of the appeal
           even if the sentence of imprisonment is
           suspended. It would be a sublime public policy
           that the convicted public servant is kept under
           disability of the conviction in spite of keeping
           the sentence of imprisonment in abeyance till
           the disposal of the appeal or revision."

9.   In   State of Haryana v. Hasmat [2004(6) SCC 175] it was

noted as follows:

              "6. Section 389 of the Code deals with
           suspension of execution of sentence pending
           the appeal and release of the appellant on bail.
           There is a distinction between bail and
           suspension of sentence. One of the essential
           ingredients of Section 389 is the requirement
           for the appellate court to record reasons in
           writing for ordering suspension of execution of
           the sentence or order appealed. If he is in
           confinement, the said court can direct that he
           be released on bail or on his own bond. The
           requirement of recording reasons in writing
           clearly indicates that there has to be careful
           consideration of the relevant aspects and the

                                                              7
           order directing suspension of sentence and
           grant of bail should not be passed as a matter
           of routine."

10.   It is to be noted that learned Single Judge while directing

suspension of conviction indicated no reasons.

11.   Above being the position the order of the learned Single

Judge directing the suspension/stay of the conviction cannot

stand and is set aside.

12.   It is submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that

hearing of the cases was posted to 22.5.2008. Since the cases

of both M.N. Sharma and Roshan Lal Saini were not posted,

the matter has been adjourned to 22.9.2008. We request the

High Court to take up the matter and dispose of the appeal as

early as practicable, preferably by end of 2008.

13.   Appeal is allowed.

                                      ..................................J.
                                      (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                                                       8
                ..................................J.
                (H.S. BEDI)
New Delhi,
July 21, 2008




                                                 9

