
Supreme Court of India
Common Cause (A Regd. Society) vs Union Of India And Others on 11 April, 2008Author: M Katju
Bench: Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  580 of 2003

PETITIONER:
Common Cause (A Regd. Society)

RESPONDENT:
Union of India and others

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/04/2008

BENCH:
Markandey Katju

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
REPORTABLE

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 580 of 2003

Markandey Katju, J.

1.	This writ petition under Article 32 of the Constitution furnishes a 
typical illustration of how public interest litigation which was conceived and 
created as a judicial tool by the courts in this country for helping the poor, 
weaker and oppressed sections of society, who could not approach the court 
due to their poverty, has over the years grown and grown, and now it seems 
to have gone totally out of control, and has become something so strange 
and bizarre that those who had created it probably would be shocked to 
know what it has become.

2.	The petitioner is a society registered under the Societies Registration 
Act which claims to be engaged in espousing problems of general public 
importance.

3.	In the present case, the petitioner has referred to the rising number of 
road accidents in the country which are taking place in cities, towns and on 
national highways causing deaths, injuries etc.  The petitioner has referred to 
the defects in the licensing procedure, the training of drivers, and the need 
for suspending licences in case of negligent driving, and driving under the 
influence of alcohol, which cause accidents etc.  He has also referred to the 
inadequate infrastructure relating to roads and inadequate provisions of 
traffic control devices including traffic signals, traffic signs, road devices 
and other road safety measures.  It has been stated in the petition that there 
should be proper and continuous coordination between various authorities 
which are connected with roads and control of traffic, and for this purpose 
the only appropriate remedy is to establish Road Safety Committees.  The 
petitioner has also emphasized the need for having readily available 
ambulances for shifting the injured persons in road accidents to hospitals for 
immediate treatment.

4.	The petitioner has also stated that there should be road safety 
education for the users of roads, pedestrians, traffic participants including 
cyclists, handcarts men, bullock- cart drivers etc., who generally have low 
socio-economic and educational background and do not know traffic rules 
and regulations.  The petitioner has alleged that pedestrians and non-
motorized traffic face enormous risks as they account for 60% to 80% of 
road traffic fatalities in the country.  All non-motorized traffic need to be 
given thorough and repeated orientation in observance of road traffic rules 
and avoidance of any situations which can cause accidents.  These road 
safety education programmes can include written material for those who are 
literate and also illustrations, slides, specially prepared films, and also 
publicity though the medium of TV and radio.  

5.	The petitioner has also alleged that there is a paramount need for 
enactment of a Road Traffic Safety Act to lay down regulations dealing with 
specific responsibilities of drivers, proper maintenance of roads and traffic-
connected signs and signals etc., and all rules and regulations for observance 
by all concerned including pedestrians and non-motorized traffic.  The Road 
Traffic Safety Act should contain all the regulations and the requirements 
relating to avoidance of accidents, responsibilities of respective Departments 
of State Governments, Municipal bodies, Police authorities, and the penalty 
for non-observance of prescribed regulations.  The Act should specify the 
duties, responsibilities, rights, directives and punishments in case of failures 
by any one e.g. driver, vehicle, road user, etc. 

6.	The petitioner has alleged that the number of accidents has increased 
greatly over the years in India and hence he has filed this writ petition with 
the following prayers: 

(i)	to issue a Writ, direction or order in the nature of 
	mandamus and /or any other writ, direction or order 
	directing   respondent   No.1  (the   Union   of   India)   in       
          consultation  with 	representatives  of  respondent Nos. 2,
          3, 4, 5	&amp; 6 (the  Government  of  NCT  of  Delhi,  and the
          State  Governments  of  Maharashtra,   Tamilnadu,  West 
          Bengal    and   Karnataka)  and  also   representatives   of
          other States/UTs :-

	 (a)  to set up fully satisfactory procedures of 
	licensing of vehicles and licensing of drivers, for 
	ensuring that the vehicles are fully equipped with all the 
	safety travel requirements, and also ensure that drivers of 
	private vehicles as well as drivers of public vehicles 
	including buses and trucks, are fully trained and are 
	competent to drive the respective types of vehicles, and
	also to organize high-level training arrangements for the 
	drivers of respective types of vehicles; appropriate 
	procedures for suspension/cancellation  of driving 
	licenses  in the event of any default or for involvement in 
	any accident;

	(b)	to ensure provision of all infrastructural 
	requirements of roads, including signs, signals, footpaths, 
	repairs of roads, and all such other requirements which 
	will help to minimize risks of accidents on the roads;

	(c)	to set up methodology and requirements for 
	undertaking scientific analysis of every accident, for 
	ensuring that similar causes do not recur which can lead  
	to accidents, thereby minimizing the possibilities of 
	accidents;  

	(d)	to establish suitable organizations for providing 
	education to all types of users of roads, through experts 
	as well as use of suitably devised visual and audio media;

	(e)	to ensure the availability of ambulances for 
	immediate removal of injured persons to hospitals;

	(f)	to set up Committees of Experts in each State/UT 
	and in the bigger cities for dealing with these various 
	requirements for minimization of accidents on the roads;	

 (ii)	to direct respondent No. 1 to formulate a suitable Road  
	Traffic Safety Act to meet effectively the various 
	requirements for minimization of road accidents; and 

(iii)	to pass such other and further orders as may be deemed 
	necessary to deal effectively with the various matters 
	relating to traffic safety on the roads and minimization of 
	road accidents, on the facts and in the circumstances of 
	the case.

7.	Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on 
the decision of the three Judge Bench of this Court in M.C. Mehta vs. 
Union of India AIR 1998 SC 190 in which the following directions have 
been given:
	"A. the Police and all other authorities entrusted with the 
	administration and enforcement of the Motor Vehicles Act and 
	generally with the control of the traffic shall ensure the 
	following: 

(a) No heavy and medium transport vehicles, and light 
goods vehicle being four wheelers would be permitted to 
operate on the roads of the NCR and NCT, Delhi, unless 
they are fitted with suitable speed control devices to 
ensure that they do not exceed the speed limit of 40 
KMPH. This will not apply to transport vehicles 
operating on Inter-State permits and national goods 
permits.  Such exempted vehicles would, however, be 
confined to such routes and such timings during day and 
night as the police/transport authorities may publish.   It 
is made clear that no vehicle would be permitted on roads 
other than the aforementioned exempted roads or during 
the times other than the aforesaid time without a speed 
control device.    

(b)	In our view the scheme of the Act necessarily 
implies an obligation to use the vehicle in a manner 
which does not imperil public safety.  The authorities 
aforesaid should, therefore, ensure that the transport 
vehicles are not permitted to overtake any other four-
wheel motorized vehicle.		

(c)	They will also ensure that wherever it exists, buses 
shall be confined to the buss lane and equally no other 
motorized vehicle is permitted to enter upon the bus lane.  
We direct the Municipal Corporation of Delhi, NDMC, 
PWD, Delhi Government and DDA, Union Government 
and the Delhi Cantt. Board to take steps to ensure that 
bus lanes are segregated and roads markings are provided 
on all such roads as may be directed by the police and 
transport authorities. 
(d)	They will ensure that buses halt only at bus stops 
designated for the purpose and within the marked area.  
In this connection also Municipal Corporation of Delhi, 
NDMC, PWD, Delhi Cantt. Board would take all steps to 
have appropriate bus stops constructed, appropriate 
markings made, and 'bus-bays' built at such places as 
may be indicated by transport/police authorities.

(e)	Any breach of the aforesaid directions by any 
person would, apart from entailing other legal 
consequences, be dealt with as contravention of the 
conditions of the permit which could entail 
suspension/cancellation of the permit and impounding of 
the vehicle.		

(f)	Every holder of a permit issued by any of the road 
transport authorities in the NCR and NCT, Delhi will 
within ten days from today, file with its RTA a list of 
drivers who are engaged by him together with suitable 
photographs and other particulars to establish the identity 
of such persons.  Every vehicle shall carry a suitable 
photograph of the authorized driver, duly certified by the 
RTA.  Any vehicle being driven by a person other than 
the authorized driver shall be treated as being used in 
contravention of the permit and the consequences would 
accordingly follow. 

	No bus belonging to or hired by an educational 
institution shall be driven by a driver who has 		
	
	-	less than ten years of experience;
	-	been challaned more than twice for a minor 	
		traffic offence;
	-	been charged for any offence relating to rash 
		and negligent driving.  	

	All such drivers would be dressed in a distinctive 
uniform, and all such buses shall carry a suitable 
inscription to indicate that they are in the duty of an 
educational institution.
(g)	To enforce these directions, flying squads made up 
of inter-departmental teams headed by an SDM shall be 
constituted and they shall exercise powers under Section 
207 as well as Section 84 of the Motor Vehicles Act.

	The Government is directed to notify under 
Section 86(4) the officers of the rank of Assistant 
Commissioners of Police or above so that these officers 
are also utilized for constituting the flying squads.		

 (h)	We direct the police and transport authorities to 
consider immediately the problems arising out of 
congestion caused by different kinds of motorized and 
non-motorized vehicles using the same roads.  For this 
purpose, we direct the police and transport authorities to 
identify those roads which they consider appropriate to 
be confined only to motorized traffic including certain 
kind of motorized traffic and identify those roads which 
they consider unfit for use by motorized or certain kinds 
of motorized traffic and to issue suitable directions to 
exclude the undesirable form of traffic from those roads.

 (i)	The civil authorities including DDA, the railways, 
the police and transport authorities, are directed to 
identify and remove all hoardings which are on roadsides 
and which are hazardous and a disturbance to safe traffic 
movement.  In addition, steps be taken to put up 
road/traffic signs which facilitate free flow of traffic.

B.	We direct the Union of India to ensure that the contents 
of this Order are suitably publicized in the print as well as the 
electronic media not later than November 22, 1997 so that 
everybody is made aware of the directions contained in the 
Order.  Such publication would be sufficient public notice to all 
concerned for due compliance".

8.	In our opinion the prayers made by the petitioner in this petition 
require us to give directions of a legislative or executive nature which can 
only be given by the legislature or executive.  As held by this Court in 
Divisional Manager, Aravali Golf Course &amp; Anr.  vs.  Chander Hass, JT 
2008(3) SC 221, the judiciary cannot encroach into the domain of the 
legislature or executive.  The doctrine of separation of powers has been 
discussed in great detail in the aforesaid decision, and we endorse the views 
expressed therein.

9.	We are fully conscious of the fact that the decision cited by Shri 
Prashant Bhushan viz. M.C. Mehta vs. Union of India (supra), is a decision 
of a three Judge Bench of this Court and would ordinarily have been binding 
on us since our Bench consists of two Judges.  However, a subsequent seven 
Judge Bench decision this Court in P. Ramachandra Rao vs. State of 
Karnataka 2002(4) SCC 578 has taken the view that such directions cannot 
be given.  In para 26 of the aforesaid decision of the seven Judge Bench in 
P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra), it was observed:

	"Professor S.P. Sathe, in his recent work (year 2002) 
Judicial Activism in India - Transgressing Borders and 
Enforcing Limits, touches the topic "Directions: A new Form of 
Judicial Legislation."  Evaluating legitimacy of judicial 
activism, the learned author has cautioned against court 
"legislating" exactly in the way in which a legislature legislates 
and he observes by reference to a few cases that the guidelines 
laid down by court, at times, cross the border of judicial law-
making in the realist sense and trench upon legislating like a 
legislature.							
"Directions are either issued to fill in the gaps in the 
legislation or to provide for matters that have not been 
provided by any legislation.  The court has taken over the 
legislative function not in the traditional interstitial sense 
but in an overt manner and has justified it as being an 
essential component of its role as a constitutional court" 	

"In a strict sense these are instances of judicial 
excessivism that fly in the face of the doctrine of 
separation of powers.  The doctrine of separation of 
powers envisages that the legislature should make law, 
the executive should execute it, and the judiciary should 
settle disputes in accordance with the existing law.  In 
reality such watertight separation exists nowhere and is 
impracticable.  Broadly, it means that one organ of the 
State should not perform a function that essentially 
belongs to another organ.  While law-making through 
interpretation and expansion of the meanings of open-
textured expressions such as 'due process of law', 'equal 
protection of law', or 'freedom of speech and expression' 
is a legitimate judicial function, the making of an entirely 
new law...through directions....is not a legitimate judicial 
function".
                                                            (emphasis supplied)	


10.	 The  aforesaid  seven  Judge  Bench  decision  of  this  Court  in       
P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra) has referred with approval the 
observations made in the book 'Judicial Activism in India  Transgressing 
Borders Enforcing Limits' by Prof. S.P. Sathe.  In that book the learned 
author has referred to the directions of a legislative nature given by various 
two Judge and three Judge Bench decisions of this Court in P.I.Ls.  The 
learned author has remarked that these were not legitimate exercise of 
judicial power. 

11.	The position has thus been clarified by the seven Judge Bench 
decision of this Court in P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra) which has 
clearly observed (in paras 22-27) that giving directions of a legislative nature 
is not a legitimate judicial function.  A seven Judge Bench decision of this 
Court will clearly prevail over smaller Bench decisions.

12.	In P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra), the question considered by 
the seven Judge Bench was whether the bar of limitation for criminal trials 
fixed by smaller Benches of this Court in Common Cause  vs.  Union of 
India, 1996(4) SCC 33, Rajdeo Sharma (I)  vs.  State of Bihar 1998(7) 
SCC 507 and Rajdeo Sharma (II)  vs.  State of Bihar 1999(7) SCC 604 
was valid.  The seven Judge Bench of this Court was of the view that the 
directions given by the smaller Benches decisions mentioned above were 
invalid as they amounted to directions of a legislative nature which only the 
legislature could give.

13.	In the aforesaid decisions of smaller Benches (which were overruled 
by the seven Judge Bench decision in P. Ramachandra Rao's case) the 
Courts were concerned with delay in disposal of criminal cases, particularly 
since the right to a speedy trial had been held to be part of Article 21 of the 
Constitution by a seven Judge Bench decision of this Court in A.R. Antulay  
vs.  R.S. Nayak 1988(2) SCC 602.

14.	Following Antulay's case, a two Judge Bench of this Court in 
Common Cause  vs.  Union of India 1996(4) SCC 33 held that if there was 
delay in disposal of certain kinds of criminal cases beyond a period specified 
by the Court the accused must be released on bail, and in certain other kinds 
of cases the criminal case itself should be closed.   Thus by judicial verdict 
the Bench fixed a limitation period in certain kinds of criminal cases.

15.	Thereafter in Rajdeo Sharma (I)  vs.  State of Bihar 1998(7) SCC 
507, a three Judge Bench of this Court directed that in certain kinds of 
criminal cases the trial court shall close the prosecution evidence on 
completion of a certain period from the date of recording the plea of the 
accused on the charges framed, and in certain cases if the accused has been 
in jail for at least half the maximum period of punishment prescribed he 
shall be released on bail.

16.  In  Rajdeo Sharma (II)  vs.  State of Bihar 1999(7) SCC 604 a three 
Judge Bench of this Court clarified certain directives in Rajdeo Sharma (I)  
vs.  State of Bihar (supra).
17.	The correctness of the aforesaid three decisions of this Court was 
considered by the seven Judge Constitution Bench in P. Ramachandra 
Rao's case (supra) and the seven Judge Bench held that these decisions were 
incorrect as they amounted to impermissible legislation by the judiciary 
(vide para 23).  The seven Judge Bench was of the view that in its zeal to 
protect the right to speedy trial of an accused the Court cannot devise and 
enact bars of limitation when the legislature and statute have chosen not to 
do so.  In paragraphs 26 and 27 of the judgment in P. Ramachandra Rao's 
case (supra) the seven Judge Bench of this Court has clearly held that 
directives of a legislative nature cannot be given by the Court, since 
legislation is the task of the legislature and not of the Court.

18. 	Before proceeding further, we would like to make it clear that we are 
not against all judicial activism.  Judicial activism can be both legitimate as 
well as illegitimate. For example, when the Courts have given an expanded 
meaning of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution vide Maneka Gandhi vs. 
Union of India AIR 1978 SC 597, it was a case of legitimate judicial 
activism because the Court gave a wider meaning to Articles 14 and 21 in 
the light of the new developments in the country.  This was a perfectly 
legitimate exercise of power.

19.	However, as pointed out by the seven Judge Bench decision of this 
Court in P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra), when Judges by judicial 
decisions lay down a new principle of law of the nature specifically reserved 
for the legislature, they legislate, and not merely declare the law (vide para 
22 of the decision in P. Ramachandra Rao's case).  This is an illegitimate 
exercise of power and many such illustrations of illegitimate exercise of 
judicial power have been given in Prof. S.P. Sathe's book 'Judicial Activism 
in India' which has been referred to with approval by the seven Judge 
Bench decision of this Court.  

20.	These are instances of judicial excessivism that fly in the face of the 
doctrine of separation of powers which has been broadly (though not 
strictly), envisaged by the Constitution vide Divisional Manager, Aravali 
Golf Club &amp; Anr. vs. Chander Hass &amp; Anr.  JT 2008 (3) SC 221, Asif 
Hameed vs. State of Jammu &amp; Kashmir JT 1989 (2) SC 548 etc.  In other 
words, while expansion of the meanings of statutory or constitutional 
provisions by judicial interpretation is a legitimate judicial function, the 
making of a new law which the Courts in this country have sometimes done, 
is not a legitimate judicial function.  The Courts of the country have 
sometimes clearly crossed the limits of the judicial function and have taken 
over functions which really belongs either to the legislature or to the 
executive.  This is unconstitutional.  If there is a law, Judges can certainly 
enforce it.  But Judges cannot create a law by judicial verdict and seek to 
enforce it.

21.	Moreover, it must be realized by the courts that they are not equipped 
with the skills, expertise or resources to discharge the functions that belong 
to the other co-ordinate organs of the government (the legislature and 
executive).  Its institutional equipment is wholly inadequate for undertaking 
legislation or administrative functions.  

22.	As observed by Hon'ble Dr. Justice A.S. Anand, former Chief Justice 
of India :

"Courts have to function within the established 
parameters and constitutional bounds.  Decisions should have a 
jurisprudential base with clearly discernible principles. Courts 
have to be careful to see that they do not overstep their limits 
because to them is assigned the sacred duty of guarding the 
Constitution.  Policy matters, fiscal, educational or otherwise, 
are thus best left to the judgment of the executive.  The danger 
of the judiciary creating a multiplicity of rights without the 
possibility of adequate enforcement will, in the ultimate 
analysis, be counter productive and undermine the credibility of 
the institution.  Courts cannot "create rights" where none exists 
nor can they go on making orders which are incapable of 
enforcement or violative of other laws or settled legal 
principles.  With a view to see that judicial activism does not 
become "judicial adventurism", the courts must act with caution 
and proper restraint.  They must remember that judicial 
activism is not an unguided missile  failure to bear this in 
mind would lead to chaos.  Public adulation must not sway the 
judges and personal aggrandizement must be eschewed.  It is 
imperative to preserve the sanctity and credibility of judicial 
process.  It needs to be remembered that courts cannot run the 
government.  The judiciary should act only as an alarm bell; it 
should ensure that the executive has become alive to perform its 
duties".

23.	We respectfully agree with the views stated above.

24.	Before proceeding further, we may state that the Motor Vehicles Act 
is a comprehensive enactment on the subject.  If there is a lacuna or defect in 
the Act, it is for the legislature to correct it by a suitable amendment and not 
by the Court.  What the petitioner really prays for in this petition is for 
various directions which would be legislative in nature, as they would 
amount to amending the Act.  

25.	In Union of India &amp; Anr. vs. Deoki Nandan Aggarwal  AIR 1992 
SC 96 a three Judge Bench of this Court observed (vide paragraph 14):
"It is not the duty of the Court either to enlarge the scope 
of the legislation or the intention of the legislature when the 
language of the provision is plain and unambiguous. The Court 
cannot rewrite, recast or reframe the legislation for the very 
good reason that it has no power to legislate.  The power to 
legislate has not been conferred on the courts.  The Court 
cannot add words to a statute or read words into it which are not 
there.  Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the words 
used by the legislature the Court could not go to its aid to 
correct or make up the deficiency.  Courts shall decide what the 
law is and not what it should be.  The Court of course adopts a 
construction which will carry out the obvious intention of the 
legislature but could not legislate itself.  But to invoke judicial 
activism to set at naught legislative judgment is subversive of 
the constitutional harmony and comity of instrumentalities.  
Modifying and altering the scheme and applying it to others 
who are not otherwise entitled to under the scheme will not also 
come under the principle of affirmative action adopted by 
courts sometimes in order to avoid discrimination.  If we may 
say so, what the High Court has done in this case is a clear and 
naked usurpation of legislative power".				

26.	This Court cannot direct legislation vide Union of India vs. Prakash 
P. Hinduja (2003) 6 SCC 195:AIR 2003 SC 2612 (vide SCC para 30: AIR 
para 29) and it cannot legislate vide Sanjay Kumar vs. State of U.P. 2004 
All LJ 239, Verareddy Kumaraswamy Reddy vs. State of A.P. (2006) 2 
SCC 670:JT(2006) 2 SC 361, Suresh Seth vs. Commr. Indore Municipal 
Corporation (2005) 13 SCC 287:AIR 2006 SC 767 (vide para 5) and Union 
of India vs. Deoki Nandan Aggarwal 1992 Supp(1) SCC 323:AIR 1992 
SC 96.  

27.	The Court should not encroach into the sphere of the other organs of 
the State vide N.K. Prasada vs. Govt. of India (2004)6 SCC 299 : JT 2004 
Supp (1) SC 326 (vide paras 27 and 28).  

28.	Thus in Supreme Court Employees' Welfare Assn. vs. Union India 
(1989) 4 SCC 187:AIR 1990 SC 334 (vide SCC p. 220, para 55) this Court 
observed: 		
"There can be no doubt that an authority exercising 
legislative function cannot be directed to do a particular 
act.  Similarly the President of India cannot be directed 
by the court to grant approval to the proposals made by 
the Registrar General of the Supreme Court, presumably 
on the direction of the Chief Justice of India".

29.	In Union of India vs. Assn. for Democratic Reforms (2002) 5 SCC 
294 : AIR 2002 SC 2112 (vide AIR para 21) this Court observed : (SCC p. 
309, para 19): 

"19. At the outset, we would say that it is not 
possible for this Court to give any directions for 
amending the Act or the statutory rules. It is for 
Parliament to amend the Act and the Rules.  It is also 
established law that no direction can be given, which 
would be contrary to the Act and the Rules."

30.	In Union of India vs. Prakash P. Hinduja (2003) 6 SCC 195:AIR 
2003 SC 2612 (vide AIR para 29) this Court observed (SCC pp. 216-17, 
para 30):
"Under our constitutional scheme Parliament 
exercises sovereign power to enact laws and no outside 
power or authority can issue a direction to enact a 
particular piece of legislation.  In Supreme Court 
Employees' Welfare Assn. vs. Union of India it has been 
held that no court can direct a legislature to enact a 
particular law. Similarly, when an executive authority 
exercises a legislative power by way of a subordinate 
legislation pursuant to the delegated authority of a 
legislature, such executive authority cannot be asked to 
enact a law which it has been empowered to do under the 
delegated legislative authority.  This view has been 
reiterated in State of J &amp; K vs. A.R. Zakki 1992 Supp 
(1) SCC 548 : AIR 1992 SC 1546".

31.	A perusal of the prayers made in this writ petition (which have been 
quoted above) clearly shows that what the petitioner wants us to do is 
legislation by amending the law.  In our opinion, this will not be a legitimate 
judicial function.  The petitioner has prayed that we direct the Union of India 
to formulate a suitable Road Traffic Safety Act, but it is well settled that the 
Court cannot direct legislation.  In fact, there is already a Road Safety 
Council as contemplated by Section 215 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 
reference of which has been made in the counter affidavit of the Central 
Government in which it has been stated that Central Government has 
constituted a National Road Safety Council which has held various 
meetings.  It is an apex body comprising of Transport Ministers of various 
States and Union Territories, DG Police of various States/Union Territories, 
representatives of various Central Ministries and agencies apart from NGOs 
and experts in the field of road safety.  In the deliberations of National Road 
Safety Council suggestions received from various quarters as also the 
measures being taken by the Ministry regarding road safety as also the areas 
of concern have been considered.  In the counter affidavit, various other 
steps taken by the respondent no.1 regarding road safety have also been 
mentioned in detail.  Some of the other respondents have also filed their 
counter affidavits mentioning the measures taken for road safety, and we 
have perused the same. 

32.	In Suresh Seth vs. Commissioner, Indore Municipal Corporation 
and others JT 2005 (9) 210, a three Judge Bench of this Court rejected the 
petitioner's prayer that appropriate amendment be made to the M.P. 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1956 debarring a person from holding two 
elected offices viz. that of a member of the Legislative Assembly and also of 
Mayor of a Municipal Corporation.  The Court observed:

"That apart this Court cannot issue any direction to the 
Legislature to make any particular kind of enactment.  Under 
our constitutional scheme Parliament and Legislative 
Assemblies exercise sovereign power or authority to enact laws 
and no outside power or authority can issue a direction to enact 
a particular piece of legislation. In Supreme Court Employees 
Welfare Association vs. Union of India (JT 1989 (3) SC 188 : 
(1989) 4 SCC 187) it has been held that no court can direct a 
legislature to enact a particular law.  Similarly, when an 
executive authority exercises a legislative power by way of a 
subordinate legislation pursuant to the delegated authority of a 
legislature, such executive authority cannot be asked to enact a 
law which it has been empowered to do under the delegated 
legislative authority".

33.	In Bal Ram Bali &amp; Anr. vs. Union of India JT 2007 (10) SC 509, a 
petition under Article 32 was filed praying for a mandamus  directing for a 
total ban of slaughtering of cows, horses, buffaloes, etc.  Rejecting this 
contention this Court observed:

"It is not within the domain of the Court to issue a 
direction for ban on slaughter of cows, buffaloes and 
horses as it is a matter of policy on which decision has to 
be taken by the Government.  That apart, a complete ban 
on slaughter of cows, buffaloes and horses, as sought in 
the present petition, can only be imposed by legislation 
enacted by the appropriate legislature.  Courts cannot 
issue any direction to the Parliament or to the State 
legislature to enact a particular kind of law".   

34.	As observed by a three Judge Bench of this Court in Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of India vs. Price Waterhouse and Anr. 1997 (6) 
SCC 312(vide para 50), Judges should not proclaim that they are playing the 
role of a law-maker merely for an exhibition of judicial valour.  They have 
to remember that there is a line, though thin, which separates adjudication 
from legislation. That line should not be crossed.

35.	In Madhu Kishwar &amp; Ors. vs. State of Bihar &amp; Ors. 1996 (5) SCC 
125 (vide para 5), this Court observed that the Court is not fully equipped to 
cope with the details and intricacies of the legislative subject, and it can at 
best advise and focus attention on the State policy on a problem and shake it 
from its slumber, goading it to awaken, march and reach the goal.  Thus, the 
Court can play a catalytic role with regard to the social and economic 
problems of the people.  However, whatever the concern of the Court, it has 
to apply somewhere and at sometimes brakes to its self-motion, described in 
judicial parlance as judicial self-restraint.  In particular, Courts must not 
legislate or perform executive functions.

36.	We would also like to advert to orders by some Courts appointing 
committees giving these committees power to issue orders to the authorities 
or to the public.  This is wholly unconstitutional.  The power to issue a 
mandamus or injunction is only with the Court.   The Court cannot abdicate 
its function by handing over its powers under the Constitution or the C.P.C. 
or Cr.P.C. to a person or committee appointed by it.  Such 'outsourcing' of 
judicial functions is not only illegal and unconstitutional, it is also giving 
rise to adverse public comment due to the alleged despotic behaviour of 
these committees and some other allegations.  A committee can be appointed 
by the Court to gather some information and/or give some suggestions to the 
Court on a matter pending before it, but the Court cannot arm such a 
committee to issue orders which only a Court can do.  

37.	We have gone deep into the subject of judicial activism and public 
interest litigation because it is often found that courts do not realize their 
own limits.  Apart from the doctrine of separation of powers, courts must 
realize that there are many problems before the country which courts cannot 
solve, however much they may like to.  It is true that the expanded scope of 
Articles 14 and 21 which has been created by this Court in various judicial 
decisions e.g. Smt. Maneka Gandhi  vs. Union of India &amp; Anr. AIR 1978 
SC 597, have given powerful tools in the hands of the judiciary.  However, 
these tools must be used with great circumspection and in exceptional cases 
and not as a routine manner.  In particular, Article 21 of the Constitution 
must not be misused by the Courts to justify every kind of directive, or to 
grant every kind of claim of the petitioner.  For instance, this Court has held 
that the right to life under Article 21 does not mean mere animal existence, 
but includes the right to live with dignity vide Olga Tellis vs. Bombay 
Corporation AIR 1986 SC 180, D.T.C. vs. D.T.C. Mazdoor Congress 
Union  AIR 1991 SC 101 (paras 223, 234, 259), Francis Coralie Mullin vs. 
Union Territory  Delhi Administrator AIR 1981 SC 746.  However, these 
decisions must be understood in a balanced way and not in an unrealistic 
sense.  For example, there is a great deal of poverty in this country and 
poverty is destructive of most of the rights including the right to a dignified 
life.  Can then the Court issue a general directive that poverty be abolished 
from the country because it violates Article 21 of the Constitution?  
Similarly, can the Court issue a directive that unemployment be abolished by 
giving everybody a suitable job?    Can the Court stop price rise which now-
a-days has become an alarming phenomenon in our country?  Can the Court 
issue a directive that corruption be abolished from the country?  Article 21 is 
not a 'brahmastra' for the judiciary to justify every kind of directive.

38.	The concern of the petitioner is that many people die in road accident.  
But many people also die due to murders.  Should then the Court issue a 
general directive that murders be not committed in the country?  And how 
would such a directive (even if issued) be implemented?

39.	We would be very happy to issue such directives if they could really 
be implementable.  However, the truth is that they are not implementable 
(for various reasons, particularly lack of financial and other resources and 
expertise in the matter).   For instance, the directives issued by this Court 
regarding road safety in M.C. Mehta's case (supra) hardly seem to have had 
any effect because everyday we read in the newspapers or see the news on 
TV about Blueline buses killing or injuring people.  In the Hawala case 
(Vineet Narain vs.  Union of India AIR 1998 SC 889) a valiant effort was 
made by this Court to check corruption, but has it made even a dent on the 
rampant corruption prevailing in the country?  It is well settled that futile 
writs should not be issued by the Court.

40.	The justification given for judicial activism is that the executive and 
legislature have failed in performing their functions.  Even if this allegation 
is true, does it justify the judiciary in taking over the functions of the 
legislature or executive?  In our opinion it does not, firstly because that 
would be in violation of the high constitutional principle of separation of 
powers between the three organs of the State, and secondly because the 
judiciary has neither the expertise nor the resources for this.  If the 
legislature or executive are not functioning properly it is for the people to 
correct the defects by exercising their franchise properly in the next elections 
and voting for candidates who will fulfill their expectations, or by other 
lawful means e.g. peaceful demonstrations and agitations, but the remedy is 
surely not by the judiciary in taking over the functions of the other organs.   

41.	In Ram Jawaya vs. State of Punjab AIR 1955 SC 549 (vide 
paragraph 12), a Constitution Bench of this Court observed:

"The Indian Constitution has not indeed 
recognized the doctrine of separation of powers in its 
absolute rigidity but the functions of the different parts or 
branches of the Government have been sufficiently 
differentiated and consequently it can very well be said 
that our Constitution does not contemplate assumption by 
one organ or part of the State, of functions that 
essentially belong to another"

							(emphasis supplied)
	
42.	Similarly, in Asif Hameed vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR 
1989 SC 1899 a three Judge Bench of this Court observed (vide paragraphs 
17 to 19) :       
"Before adverting to the controversy directly involved in 
these appeals we may have a fresh look on the inter se 
functioning of the three organs of democracy under our 
Constitution.  Although the doctrine of separation of 
powers has not been recognized under the Constitution in 
its absolute rigidity but the constitution makers have 
meticulously defined the functions of various organs of 
the State.  Legislature, executive and judiciary have to 
function within their own spheres demarcated under the 
Constitution.  No organ can usurp the functions assigned 
to another.  The Constitution trusts to the judgment of 
these organs to function and exercise their discretion by 
strictly following the procedure prescribed therein.  The 
functioning of democracy depends upon the strength and 
independence of each of its organs.  Legislature and 
executive, the two facets of people's will, have all the 
powers including that of finance.  Judiciary has no power 
over sword or the purse nonetheless it has power to 
ensure that the aforesaid two main organs of State 
function within the constitutional limits.  It is the sentinel 
of democracy.  Judicial review is a powerful weapon to 
restrain unconstitutional exercise of power by the 
legislature and executive. The expanding horizon of 
judicial review has taken in its fold the concept of social 
and economic justice.  While exercise of powers by the 
legislature and executive is subject to judicial restraint, 
the only check on our own exercise of power is the self 
imposed discipline of judicial restraint.

	Frankfurter, J. of the U.S. Supreme Court 
dissenting in the controversial expatriation case of Trop 
v. Dulles (1958) 356 US 86 observed as under :

"All power is, in Madison's phrase, "of an 
encroaching nature".  Judicial power is not 
immune against this human weakness.  It 
also must be on guard against encroaching 
beyond its proper bounds, and not the less so 
since the only restraint upon it is self 
restraint."

                                       (emphasis supplied)


43.	The directives sought for in this petition require the expertise of 
administrative and technical officials, apart from financial resources.  Not 
only should the Court not give such directives because that would violate the 
principle of separation of powers, but also because these are highly technical 
matters to be left to be dealt with by administrative and technical authorities 
who have experience and expertise in the matter.  For instance, what should 
be the maximum permissible speed for vehicles in a city, where should 
speed breakers be fixed, when should heavy vehicles be allowed on roads, 
and other matters for ensuring road safety are all matters to be dealt with by 
the concerned authorities under the Motor Vehicles Act and other 
enactments, and it would be wholly inappropriate for the judiciary to meddle 
in such matters.  Decisions on such matters by the judiciary land the 
administrative agencies in practical difficulties and make them bear the 
brunt of the decisions of the Court some of which are wholly oblivious to 
administrative needs and as such ill conceived.

44.	Moreover, if once the Courts take upon themselves the task of issuing 
ukases as to how administrative agencies should function, what is there to 
prevent them from issuing directions as to how the State Government or 
Central Government should administer the State and run the country?  In our 
opinion such an approach would not only disturb the delicate balance of 
powers between the three wings of the State, it would also strike at the very 
basis of our democratic polity which postulates that the governance of the 
country should be carried on by the executive enjoying the confidence of the 
legislature which is answerable and accountable to the people at the time of 
elections.  Such an approach would in our opinion result in judicial oligarchy 
dethroning democratic supremacy.

45.	In our opinion the Court should not assume such awesome 
responsibility even on a limited scale.  The country can ill afford to be 
governed through court decrees.  Any such attempt will not only be grossly 
undemocratic, it would be most hazardous as the Courts do not have the 
expertise or resources in this connection.  The judiciary is not in a position to 
provide solutions to each and every problem, although human ingenuity 
would not be lacking to give it some kind of shape or semblance of a legal or 
constitutional right, e.g. by resorting to Article 21.

46.	When other agencies or wings of the State overstep their 
constitutional limits, the aggrieved parties can always approach the courts 
and seek redress against such transgression.  If, however, the court itself 
becomes guilty of such transgression, to which forum would the aggrieved 
party appeal?  As the ancient Romans used to say "Who will guard the 
Praetorian guards?"   The only check on the courts is its own self restraint.

47.	The worst result of judicial activism is unpredictability.  Unless 
Judges exercise self restraint, each Judge can become a law unto himself and 
issue directions according to his own personal fancies, which will create 
chaos.

48.	It must be remembered that a Judge has to dispense justice according 
to the law and the Constitution.  He cannot ask the other branches of the 
State to keep within their constitutional limits if he exceeds his own.

49.	As stated by A.G. Noorani in his article on `Judicial Activism vs. 
Judicial Restraint' (published in SPAN magazine of April/May, 1997 
edition) :
	"Zeal leads judges to enter areas with whose 
terrain they are not familiar; to order minutiae of 
administration without reckoning with the consequences 
of their orders.  Judges have made orders not only how to 
run prisons but also hospitals, mental homes and schools 
to a degree which stuns the professional.  In their 
judgments they draw on material which is untested and 
controversial and which they are ill-equipped to 
evaluate."  

50.	In our opinion adjudication must be done within the system of 
historically validated restraints and conscious minimization of the Judges' 
preferences.  The Court must not embarrass the administrative authorities 
and must realize that administrative authorities have expertise in the field of 
administration while the Court does not.  In the words of Chief Justice 
Neely, former Chief Justice of the West Virginia State Supreme Court:
	"I have very few illusions about my own 
limitations as a judge.  I am not an accountant, electrical 
engineer, financier, banker, stockbroker or system 
management analyst.  It is the height of folly to expect 
Judges intelligently to review a 5000 page record 
addressing the intricacies of a public utility operation.  It 
is not the function of a Judge to act as a super board, or 
with the zeal of a pedantic school master substituting his 
judgment for that of the administrator."

51.	As observed by Mr. Justice Cardozo of the U.S. Supreme Court :

	"The judge, even when he is free, is still not 
wholly free.  He is not to innovate at pleasure.  He is not 
a knight-errant, roaming at will in pursuit of his own 
ideal of beauty or of goodness.  He is to draw his 
inspiration from consecrated principles.  He is not to 
yield to spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated 
benevolence.  He is to exercise a discretion informed by 
tradition, methodized by analogy, disciplined by system, 
and subordinated to "promotional necessity of order in 
the social life."

			(see Cardozo's 'The Nature of the Judicial Process')	

52.	Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 has provisions for 
control of traffic.  These include fixing limits of speed (s.112), restriction on 
use of certain vehicles (s.115), power to erect traffic signs (s.116), fixing 
parking places (s.117), making driving regulations (s.118), duty to obey 
traffic signs (s.119), requirement for drivers to make such signals as are 
prescribed (s.121), safety measures for drivers and pillion riders on two 
wheelers (s.128), wearing of protective headgear (s.129), etc.  These  
provisions are obviously meant for road safety, and if further provisions are 
required for this purpose the petitioner may approach the legislature or 
concerned authority for this purpose, but this Court can certainly not amend 
the law.       

53.	The people must know that Courts are not the remedy for all ills in 
society.  The problems confronting the nation are so huge that it will be 
creating an illusion in the minds of the people that the judiciary can solve all 
the problems. No doubt, the judiciary can make some 
suggestions/recommendations to the legislature or the executive, but these 
suggestions/recommendations cannot be binding on the legislature or the 
executive, otherwise there will be violation of the seven-Judge Bench 
decision of this Court in P. Ramachandra Rao's case (supra), and violation 
of the principle of separation of powers.  The judiciary must know its limits 
and exercise judicial restraint vide Divisional Manager, Aravali Golf 
Course &amp; Anr.  vs.  Chander Hass, JT 2008(3) SC 221.  The people must 
also realize that the judiciary has its limits and cannot solve all their 
problems, despite its best intentions.

54.	The problems facing the people of India have to be solved by the 
people themselves by using their creativity and by scientific thinking and not 
by using judicial crutches like PILs.

55.	These problems (e.g. poverty, unemployment, price rise, corruption, 
lack of education, medical aid and housing, etc.) are so massive that they can 
only be solved by certain historical, political and social forces that can only 
be generated by the people themselves using their creativity and scientific 
thinking.

56.	The view that the judiciary can run the government and can solve all 
the problems of the people is not only unconstitutional, but also it is 
fallacious and creates a false impression and false illusion that the judiciary 
is a panacea for all ills in society.  Such illusions, in fact, do great harm to 
the people because it makes the people believe that their problems can be 
solved by others and not by the people themselves.  It debilitates their will 
and makes them believe that they can solve their problems and improve their 
conditions not by their own struggles and creativity but by filing a PIL in 
Court.

57.	Before concluding, we would like to refer to the decision of this Court 
in Dattaraj Nathuji Thaware vs. State of Maharashtra AIR 2005 SC 540 
in which Hon'ble Pasayat J. expressed the view about Public Interest 
Litigation in the following memorable words:

	"It is depressing to note that on account of such trumpery 
proceedings initiated before the Courts, innumerable days are 
wasted, which time otherwise could have been spent for the 
disposal of cases of the genuine litigants.  Though we spare no 
efforts in fostering and developing the laudable concept of PIL 
and extending our long arm of sympathy to the poor, the 
ignorant, the oppressed and the needy whose fundamental rights 
are infringed and violated and whose grievances go unnoticed, 
unrepresented and unheard; yet we cannot avoid but expressing  
our opinion that while genuine litigants with legitimate 
grievances relating to civil matters involving properties worth 
hundreds of millions of rupees and criminal cases in which 
persons sentenced to death facing gallows under untold agony 
and persons sentenced to life imprisonment and kept in 
incarceration for long years, persons suffering from undue 
delay in service matters, Government or private, persons 
awaiting the disposal of cases wherein huge amounts of public 
revenue or unauthorized collection of tax amounts are locked 
up, detenus expecting their release from the detention orders 
etc. etc. are all standing in a long serpentine queue for years 
with the fond hope of getting into the Courts and having their 
grievances redressed, the busybodies, meddlesome interlopers, 
wayfarers or officious interveners having absolutely no public 
interest except for personal gain or private profit either of 
themselves or as proxy of others or for any other extraneous 
motivation or for glare of publicity break the queue muffing 
their faces by wearing the mask of public interest litigation and 
get into the Courts by filing vexatious and frivolous petitions 
and thus criminally waste the valuable time of the Courts, as a 
result of which the queue standing outside the doors of the 
Courts never moves, which piquant situation creates frustration 
in the minds of the genuine litigants and resultantly they lose 
faith in the administration of our judicial system".

58.	In the same decision it has also been observed that PIL is a weapon 
which is to be used with great care and circumspection.  

59.	Unfortunately, the truth is that PILs are being entertained by many 
courts as a routine and the result is that the dockets of most of the superior 
courts are flooded with PILs, most of which are frivolous or for which the 
judiciary has no remedy. As stated in Dattaraj Nathuji Thaware's case 
(supra), public interest litigation has nowadays largely become 'publicity 
interest litigation', 'private interest litigation', or 'politics interest litigation' or 
the latest trend 'paise income litigation'.  Much of P.I.L. is really blackmail.

60.	Thus, Public Interest Litigation which was initially created as a useful 
judicial tool to help the poor and weaker section of society who could not 
afford to come to courts, has, in course of time, largely developed into an 
uncontrollable Frankenstein and a nuisance which is threatening to choke the 
dockets of the superior courts obstructing the hearing of the genuine and 
regular cases which have been waiting to be taken up for years together.

61.	With the above observations, the Writ Petition is dismissed.                             

