
Supreme Court of India
State Of Uttarnchal &amp; Anr vs Madan Joshi &amp; Anr on 13 May, 2008Author: S Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
                                                                  REPORTABLE

                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                  CIVIL APPEAL NO. 3540 OF 2008
                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.12124 of 2006)


State of Uttaranchal &amp; Anr.                             ... Appellant

                                  Versus

Madan Mohan Joshi &amp; Ors.                          ... Respondents




                            JUDGMENT

S.B. Sinha, J.


1.    Leave granted.


2.    Inter se seniority amongst the teachers of Kumaon University is in

question in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated

21.3.2006 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Uttaranchal

at Nainital in Writ Petition No.71 of 2004).
                                    2
        Before adverting to the aforementioned question, we may notice

the factual matrix involved in the matter.


3.      First Respondent was appointed on an ad hoc basis as a Lecturer in

Government P.G. College, Almora by the State of Utter Pradesh through

Vice-Chancellor, Kumaon University on or about 22.9.1975. The said

College was declared as the Campus College of the University. All

Lecturers including the first respondent were continued and treated on

deputation with the University; the cut off date wherefor was fixed

16.8.1977. The State of Utter Pradesh framed U.P. Regularization Rules,

1979, the relevant provisions whereof reads as under :


              4.(i) Any person who
              (i)    was directly appointed on ad hoc basis
                     before 1.1.1977 and is continuing in
                     service.
              (ii)   Possessed      requisite     qualification
                     prescribed for regular appointment at the
                     time of such ad hoc appointment, and
(iii)   Has completed or, as the case may be, after he has
        completed three years continuous service.
              Shall be considered for regular appointment in
              permanent or temporary vacancy as may be
              available on regular appointment is made in
              such vacancy in accordance with the relevant
              service rules or orders."
                                   3
4.    Pursuant to and in furtherance of the said Rules, services of 355 ad

hoc Lecturers were regularized. However, the cases of nine Lecturers

including the first respondent, who had been working on deputation,

were left out. It is contended that one Savita (Mohan) Dhondiyal who

had also been appointed as an ad hoc Lecturer on 17.4.1975 and, thus,

being junior to the first respondent was regularized.


5.    Representations were made by the respondents and others. The

Directorate of Higher Education, Uttar Pradesh asked the Vice-

Chancellor of the University to forward the list of the said Lecturers

pursuant whereto, services of nine Lecturers including the respondent

were regularized by an order dated 11.7.1980, stating :


             "The appointing authority in exercise of powers
             conferred by Rule 5 of the Regularisation of Ad
             hoc Employees on the posts within the
             jurisdiction of the U.P. Public Service
             Commission Rules, 1979 issued by the
             Department of Personnel vide its Notification
             No.19/8/75[1] dated 14th May, 1979, and in
             view of the recommendations made by the
             Selection     Committee      constituted     for
             regularization of the ad hoc lecturers working
             in various Government Colleges under the
             Directorate of Education prior to 1st January,
             1977 in the pay scale of 700-1600, hereby
             regularizes appointments of the lecturers with
             effect from the date of issuance of this order
             and they are being given temporarily regular
                                  4

             appointments on the posts of Lecturers w.e.f.
             11th July, 1980.
             However, the seniority of these lecturers shall
             be according to their Serial number given in the
             enclosed Annexure and they will be junior to
             those lecturers who have been regularized and
             appointed prior to the date of regular
             appointment of these lecturers."

6.    Aggrieved by the said order, they made a representation.


7.    By an order dated 9.6.1988, the services of the respondent were

appointed with effect from 1.7.1983, it was stated :


             "Following officers of the Government Colleges
             working as Lecturers in Botany Science in the pay
             scale of 2200-4000 are hereby appointed on
             probation period of two years on the same dates
             with effect from the dates mentioned against their
             names and their earlier services would be counted
             towards this probation period and they are hereby
             regularized on the said post and in the same pay
             scale.    However, their seniority would be
             determined later on.
             Sr. Name and designation        Date of Details of
             No. of Officer who has                regulari-
             vacancies
                   Been regularized.         sed

             1-20 XX                         XX         XX

21.   Shri Madan Mohan      1.7.1983 Regularised
                 Joshi, Lecturer in              on the post
                 Botany Science                  w.e.f 1.7.1983
                                  5

                                                     Vide G.O.
                                                     No.2058/15
                                                     84-11-12-46/81
                                                     Dt. 1.8.1984"



8.    The State of Uttarakhand then known as State of Uttaranchal has

been curved out from the State of Uttar Pradesh. In the seniority list, the

first respondent was placed at serial number 137 whereas Mrs. Savita

(Mohan) Dhondyal was placed at serial No.102. Objections were filed to

the said seniority list wherefor recommendations were made by the

Directorate of Higher Education in the following terms :

             "Dr. Joshi was appointed on ad hoc basis and
             pursuant to his appointment he joined Almora
             College on 22nd September, 1975. Later on his
             services were approved by the Director of
             Education (Higher Education), Uttar Pradesh,
             Allahabad on 27th March, 1976 with effect from
             the date of his joining the post. His name in the
             seniority list would have been mentioned at Sr.
             No.102 after the name of Smt. Deveshwari
             Bisht on the basis of his order of first
             appointment. But it would have been possible
             if his name would have been considered in the
             order of regularization dated 22nd May, 1980. It
             appears that his name was not included in the
             said order dated 22nd May, 1980 although Shri
             Joshi was fully eligible for being considered in
             the said order dated 22nd May, 1980 according
             to the Regularisation Rules of 1979. Therefore,
             if the Government so wishes, his order of
             regularization dated 11th July, 1980 should be
             amended to the above effect."
                                   6
9.    A writ petition was filed by the first respondent before the High

Court of Uttaranchal at Nainital which by reason of the impugned

judgment has been allowed.

10.   Mr. Gopal Subramanium, learned Additional Solicitor General

appearing on behalf of the State, would submit that the High Court

committed a serious error insofar as it failed to take into consideration

that the State Uttaranchal, having framed the Uttaranchal Higher

Education (Group A) Service Rules, was bound by the provisions thereof

and in that view of the matter, the High Court committed a serious error

insofar as it failed to take into consideration the effect of the statutory

rules governing the field in their proper perspectives.


11.   Mr. Garg, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent,

on the other hand, would contend that as the instant case is governed by

the Rules which were applicable prior to coming into force of 2003

Rules, the High Court has not committed any illegality or the impugned

judgment is unassailable.


12.   It was contended that in the writ petition it was not necessary for

the first respondent even to implead the said Savita (Mohan) Dhondyal
                                  7

and others as party respondents, as no relief had been claimed against

them. Reliance has been placed on A. Janardhana v. Union of India &amp;

Ors. [(1983) 3 SCC 601].


13.   Services of the first respondent as also several others including

Savita (Mohan) Dhondyal, as noticed herein before were regularized in

terms of the provisions of the U.P. Regularisation Rules.


      Indisputably, services of those whose names appear above the first

respondent, services of those were regularized w.e.f 22.5.1980 whereas

that of the first respondent was regularized from 11.7.1980. The order

dated 11.7.1980 categorically stated :


            "Under Rule 4(3) of Uttar Pradesh Regularisation
            of Ad hoc Appointment within the purview of
            Public Service Commission Rules 1979 framed
            vide notification No.19/8/75 (1) dated 14-5-1979
            by the Personnel Department, on the
            recommendation of the Selection Committee
            constituted for regularization of Lecturers
            appointed on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of
            Rs.700-1600 prior to 1-1-1977 in the U.P.
            Government Inter Colleges under the Directorate
            of Higher Education and in exercise of powers
            under Rule 5 of the aforesaid Rules the
            competent authority is pleased to regularize ad
            hoc appointment of Lecturers mentioned in the
            Schedule-1 w.e.f. the date of issuance of this
            order and they are given regular temporary
            appointment on the post of Lecturer w.e.f.
            11.7.1980.
                                     8
             The seniority of these Lecturers will be as per the
             serial given in the schedule and they will be
             junior to the regularly selected Lecturers who
             have been appointed prior to the regular
             appointment of these Lecturers."

      The said direction has not been set aside by the High Court.

Validity thereof may be in question in the writ petition.


14.   The question as to which Rule would govern the inter se seniority

amongst the parties has not been determined. Rule was framed by the

State of Uttaranchal in 2003 in terms of the proviso appended to Article

309 of the Constitution of India.


      Rule 3(k) defines `substantive appointment' to mean an

appointment, not being an ad hoc appointment, on a post in the cadre of

the Service made after selection in accordance with the rules and if there

are no rules in accordance with the procedure prescribed for the time

being by executive instruction issued by the Government.


15.   Rule 20 of the said Rules lays down the mode of determining

seniority in the following terms :


             "20. Seniority :
             (1) Except as hereinafter provided, the
             seniority of persons in any category of posts
                                     9

             shall be determined from the date of the order
             of substantive appointment and if two or more
             persons are appointed together by the order in
             that case it will mean the date of issue of order :
             Provided that -
             (a)   if the appointment order specified a
                   particular back date with effect from
                   which     a     person    is     appointed,
                   substantively, that date will be deemed to
                   be the date of order of substantive
                   appointment and in other cases it will
                   mean the date of issue of the order;
             (b)   if more than one order of appointment
                   are issued in respect of any one selection,
                   the seniority shall be as mentioned in the
                   combined order of appointment issued
                   under sub-rule (2) of rule 17.
             (2) The seniority inter se of persons
             appointed directly on the result of any one
             selection shall be the same as determined by the
             Commission :
             Provided that a candidate recruited directly may
             lose his seniority if he fails to join without valid
             reasons when the post is offered to him. The
             decision of the Appointing Authority as to the
             validity of reasons shall be final.
             (3) The seniority inter-se of persons
             appointed by promotion shall be the same as it
             was in the cadre from which they were
             promoted."
      The said Rule also contains a power of relaxation being Rule 25

which is to the following effect :
                                 10
            "25. Relaxation of the Conditions of service :
            Where the State Government is satisfied that
            the operation of any rule regulating the
            conditions of Service of a person appointed to
            the Service causes undue hardship in any
            particular case, it may notwithstanding any
            thing contained in the rules applicable to the
            case, by order dispense with or relax the
            requirements of that rule to such extent and
            subject to such conditions, as it may consider
            necessary, for dealing with the case in a just
            and equitable manner :
            Provided that where a rule has been framed in
            consultation with the Commission that body
            shall be consulted before the requirements of
            the rule are dispensed with or relaxed."

16.   The question as to whether the said Rules will have retrospective

effect or in any event will govern the cases of the parties, thus, was

required to be determined by the High Court.


17.   The High Court, in its impugned judgment, proceeded on the basis

as to what would constitute a substantive appointment. The decisions of

this Court, whereupon strong reliance has been placed by the High Court

in arriving at its conclusion may not be of much significance but what is

significant is that in the writ petition even Savita (Mohan) Dhondyal and

others who lose their seniority in the event writ petition was to be

allowed, were not impleaded as parties. They, in our opinion, should
                                   11

have been impleaded as parties in the writ application. Savita (Mohan)

Dhondyal and others, if the writ petition is allowed, would suffer civil

consequences. Inter se seniority may not be a fundamental right, but is a

civil right. [See State of UP &amp; Anr. v. Dinkar Sinha [2007 (7) SCALE

8].   The respective rights of seniority of the parties, thus, required

determination in their presence.

18.   A Three Judge Bench of Court in Prabodh Verma &amp; Ors. v. State

of Uttar Pradesh &amp; Ors. [AIR 1985 SC 167], stated the law as under :

             "A High Court ought not to decide a writ
             petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
             without the persons who would be vitally
             affected by its judgment being before it as
             respondents or at least by some of them being
             before it as respondents in a representative
             capacity if their number is too large, and,
             therefore, the Allahabad High Court ought not
             to have proceeded to hear and dispose of the
             Sangh's writ petition without insisting upon the
             reserve pool teachers being made respondents
             to that writ petition, or at least some of them
             being made respondents in a representative
             capacity, and had the petitioners refused to do
             so, ought to have dismissed that petition for
             non-joinder of necessary parties."

19.   Reliance placed on A. Janardhana (supra) by Mr. Garg, in our

opinion, is misplaced.    Therein, no relief was claimed against any
                                  12

individual. The only relief which was claimed therein was against the

Union of India. The question which was raised therein was a question of

interpretation. It was in the aforementioned situation, this Court held

that all the employees were not required to be impleaded as a party. In

that case, the case of direct recruits has not gone unrepresented. It was

stated:

             "In this case, appellant does not claim seniority
             over any particular individual in the
             background of any particular fact controverted
             by that person against whom the claim is made.
             The contention is that criteria adopted by the
             Union Government in drawing up the
             impugned seniority list are invalid and illegal
             and the relief is claimed against the Union
             Government restraining it from upsetting or
             quashing the already drawn up valid list and for
             quashing the impugned seniority list. Thus, the
             relief is claimed against the Union Government
             and not against any particular individual. In
             this background, we consider it unnecessary to
             have all direct recruits to be impleaded as
             respondent."

20.   For the reasons aforementioned, we are of the opinion that the

interest of justice would be subserved if the impugned judgment is set

aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for consideration of the

matter afresh. In the writ petition, the first respondent may file an

appropriate application for impleading Savita (Mohan) Dhondyal and
                                 13

others as parties and/or some teachers in their representative capacity.

The High Court is requested to allow the said application for

impleadment and determine the matter in accordance with law as

expeditiously as possible, preferably within the period of 8 weeks of the

communication of this Order.


21.   The appeal is disposed of accordingly.


                                               .............................J.
                                               [S.B. Sinha]


                                               .............................J.
                                               [Lokeshwar Singh Panta]

New Delhi
May 13, 2008

