
Supreme Court of India
Santosh Kumar Singh And Ors vs The State Of Bihar And Ors on 1 February, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1263 of 2001

PETITIONER:
Santosh Kumar Singh and Ors.

RESPONDENT:
The State of Bihar and Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 01/02/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a Division 
Bench of the Patna High Court dismissing the Letters Patent 
Appeal filed by the appellants.  

2.	The factual controversy lies in a very narrow compass.    

     Proceedings under the Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of  
Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Act, 1961 (in 
short the Act) were initiated against the landholder family of 
Budh Prakash Singh.  Smt. Kamla Devi was daughter in law 
and Smt. Bageshwari Devi was grand daughter of aforesaid 
Budh Prakash Singh.  In the said Land Ceiling Case No. 
23/73-74 after draft publication and on consideration of the 
objection made by Budh Prakash Singh, orders were passed 
by the L.R.D.C., Aurangabad against which the aforesaid 
persons filed an application for revision before the revisional 
authority.  By order dated 7.4.1977 the revisional authority in 
revision case No.1986/76 accepted some of the objections of 
Budh Prakash Singh, but parts of the objections were rejected.  
However, as final publication was not made, after the 
amendment of the Act by Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of 
Ceiling Area and Acquisition of Surplus Land) Amendment Act, 
1982 (hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act), the 
matter was taken afresh from the stage of Section 10 of the 
Act.  At the stage of fresh proceedings following objections 
were raised:
(a)	The classification of lands was not properly made.
(b)	The lands which belonged to the son Chittaranjan 
Prasad Singh (now deceased) should not have been 
included. 
(c)	The lands gifted to Smt. Kamla Devi, daughter-in-
law; lands gifted to Smt. Bageshwari Devi, grand 
daughter and lands gifted to two daughters, namely, 
Nirmala Kumari and Sashibala within the grace 
period should be excluded.

3.	L.R.D.C. by order dated 14.5.1984 accepted part of the 
objection and ordered for exclusion of the land gifted during 
grace period in favour of two daughters, namely, Nirmala 
Kumari and Sashibala.  However, rest of the objections 
including the objection relating to classification of land was 
rejected.  A Ceiling Appeal was preferred and the appellate 
authority by order dated 10.9.1985 accepted part of the 
objection.  Certain lands which were earlier classified as Class-
I land were held not properly to have been done.  However, the 
other part of the classification was held to be valid.  The gift 
made in favour of the two daughters was confirmed but the 
claim relating to deletion of land gifted in favour of daughter-
in-law, Kamla Devi and grand daughter Bageshwari Devi was 
rejected.  Thereafter revision case No.387/85 was preferred.  
The revisional authority by revisional order dated 28.4.1987, 
rejected the same.  A writ petition was filed before the High 
Court and the primary stand was relating to classification 
made to declare certain lands as surplus.  Similarly, non-
exclusion of the gifts in favour of Kamla Devi and Bageshwari 
Devi were questioned.  The States stand was that the 
amended definition of landholder as amended in 1973 was 
applicable.  It was pointed out that the land ceiling 
proceedings were not initiated against any individual but 
against the family.  In view of the definition of the expression 
family, Kamla Devi, Bagehswari Devi and Chittaranjan 
Prasad Singh come within the definition of family and their 
land stood included.  So far as the classification is concerned, 
it was submitted that after due verification and with reference 
to irrigational facility available the classification was made.                             

4.	Learned Single Judge of the High Court did not find any 
substance in the stand taken in the writ petition.  It was noted 
that gift was made in favour of Bageshwari Devi when she was 
child of about 8 months and even after such alleged gift rent 
was paid to Budh Parkash Singh and the lands purportedly to 
be gifted to Kamla Devi and Bageshwari Devi were, in fact, in 
the possession of Budh Parkash Singh. The writ petition was 
dismissed.  In the writ appeal, the stand taken was that the 
effect of the amended provisions i.e.  Sections 32A and 32B 
had not been kept in view.  It was submitted that there was no 
de novo  enquiry and that having been not done, the judgment 
of the learned Single Judge was unsustainable.  The Division 
Bench did not find any substance in the plea and with 
reference to Section 10 of the Act,  writ appeal was dismissed.     

5.	In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the 
appellant submitted that the true effect of the amendment has 
not been kept in view.  If the draft statement was repeated 
there was no need for inserting Sections 32A and 32B.  
According to him, there was need for enquiry and the 
procedures contemplated under Sections 6, 8 and 9 were to be 
adopted.       

6.	Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand 
supported the orders. 

7.	At this juncture, it would be appropriate to take note of 
Sections10, 11, 32A and 32B of the Act.  They read as follows:

10.	Preparation of draft statement,--(1) On the 
basis of the information given by or on behalf of 
the land holder under Section 6, 8, 9 or the 
information obtained by the Collector under 
Section. 7, checked in the prescribed manner, the 
Collector shall cause a draft statement to be 
prepared showing the following particulars

(a) the area and description of-
(i) 	each class of land held by the land-
holder and the land selected by him 
which he desires to be included within 
his ceiling area ;
(ii) 	orchards held by him and the orchards 
in compact blocks he desires to retain ;

(iii) 	homestead land and the pucca 
structures including the land necessary 
for the use and enjoyment of such 
structures, held by him on the date of 
commencement of this Act, and such 
land pucca structures including land 
necessary for the use and enjoyment of 
the pucca structures which he desires 
to retain ;

 (b) area and description of land of each of the 
categories in clause (a) which is allowed by the 
Collector to be held and retained by the land 
holder under Section 5;
(c) the area and description of the land which is 
in excess of the limit permissible under Section 5 
and which the land holder is not entitled to hold 
or retain under this Act (hereinafter to be called_ 
the `surplus' lead);

2[(c-1) the area and description of land 
transferred by the land-holder in accordance with 
or in contravention of the provisions of clause (ii) 
of sub-section (1) of Section 5 ;

(c-2) the substance of the findings of the Collector 
under clause (iii) of sub-section (1) of Section 5; 

(c-3) the substance of the recommendation and 
order regarding exemption under Section 29; and]

(d) any other particular which may be prescribed.

[(2) The draft statement shall be published in the 
Official Gazette of the district and at such places, 
and in such manner, as may be prescribed:

     Provided that a copy of the draft statement 
shall be served on the landholders concerned or 
on their guardian or guardians, as the case may 
be, by registered post with acknowledgment due 
which shall be conclusive evidence of the service 
of such notice.]

[(3) Any objection to the draft statement in respect 
of the matters specified in clause (a), (b), (c) and 
(d) of subsection (1) received within 30 days of the 
publication of the draft statement or service 
thereof under sub-section (2), whichever is latter. 
preferred by any person having any claim or 
interest in said matters shall be considered by the 
Collector who shall, after giving the parties a 
"reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
adducing evidence, pass such order as he thinks 
fit.

     Provided that the Collector may on an 
application made by the land-holder or a person 
having claim or interest in the land extend the 
period of filing objection by another fifteen days.]

11.	Final publication of draft statement--((1) 
When the objection or claim if any, preferred 
under sub-section (3) of Section 10 has been 
disposed of, the Collector shall, whether there is 
any surplus land or not, make such alteration in 
the draft statement as may be necessary to give 
effect to any order passed on the objection or 
claim and shall cause the said statement with the 
alteration, if any, to be finally published in the 
official Gazette of the district and in such place 
and in such manner as may be prescribed and a 
copy thereof duly certified by the Collector in the 
prescribed manner, shall be sent to the land-
holder by registered post with acknowledgment 
due.]

((2) Copies of such statement duly authenticated 
in the prescribed manner shall by the Collector 
within such period and to such authority or 
authorities, as may be proscribed.]
32-A.	Abatement of appeal, revision, review or 
reference.-An appeal, revision, review or reference 
other than those arising out of order passed 
under Section 8 or sub-section (3) of Section 16 
pending before any authority on the date of 
commencement of the Bihar Land Reforms 
(Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition of 
Surplus Land) (Amendment) Act, 1982 shall abate
     Provided that on such abatement, the 
Collector shall proceed with the case afresh in 
accordance with the provisions of Section 10:

     Provided further that such appeal, revision, 
review or reference arising out of orders passed 
under Section 8 of sub-section (3) of Section 16 as 
has abated under Section 13 of the Bihar Land 
Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area and Acquisition 
of Surplus Land) (Amendment) Ordinance, 1981 
(Bihar Ordinance No. 66 of 1981) shall stand 
automatically restored before the proper authority 
on the commencement of this Act.

32-B	 Initiation of fresh proceeding.--All those 
proceedings other than appeal, revision, review 
or reference referred to in Section 32-A 
pending on the date of commencement of the 
Bihar Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling Area 
and Acquisition of Surplus Land) (Amendment) 
Act, 1982 and in which final publication under 
sub-section (1) of Section 11 of the Act as it 
stood before the amendment by the aforesaid 
Act, had not been made, shall be disposed of 
afresh in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 10 of the Act".]


8.	A bare reading of Section 32-A shows that where an 
appeal, revision, review or reference other than those arising 
out of order passed under Section 8 or sub-section (3) of 
Section 16 is pending before any authority on the date of 
commencement of the Act, the same shall abate.  The proviso 
is of significance.  It stipulates that the Collector shall proceed 
with the case afresh in accordance with provisions of Section 
10.   The interpretation given by the learned counsel for the 
appellants is that the use of the expression afresh means 
that whatever was done earlier has to be totally obliterated 
and there has to be a fresh look on all aspects including 
classification and status of the parties involved.  Sub-section 
(1) of Section 10 deals with preparation of draft statement.  
Sub-section (3) is of considerable importance.  It provides that 
when there is any objection to the draft statement in respect of 
the matters specified in clause (a), (b), (c) and (d) of sub-
section (1) received within 30 days of the publication of the 
draft statement or service thereof under sub-section (2), which 
ever is latter, when preferred by any person having claim or 
interest in the matters shall be considered by the Collector 
and after giving reasonable opportunity of adducing evidence 
the Collector shall pass such orders as it deems fit.  Even 
though there is repetition of the draft statement which was 
prepared earlier, the scope for making objection as provided 
under sub-section (3) of Section 10 still exists.  If the noticee 
has any objection to any part of the draft statement in respect 
of the specified matters, the same can be taken within the 
stipulated period and the authorities are required to consider 
them. There is also provision for adducing evidence. 
9.	That being so, the stand that the person who wants to 
prefer the objection is deprived of adequate opportunity is 
without substance.                                	

10.	In view of the above position, there is no merit in this 
appeal which is accordingly dismissed.  There will be no order 
as to costs. 	

