
Supreme Court of India
Haryana State Electricity Board ... vs Chander Pal Singh on 2 May, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  3252 of 2008

PETITIONER:
HARYANA STATE ELECTRICITY BOARD AND ORS. 

RESPONDENT:
CHANDER PAL SINGH

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 02/05/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; LOKESHWAR SINGH PANTA

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT


O R D E R
[Arising out of SLP(C) No. 2351/2006]
1.	Leave granted.
2.	The grievance of the appellants is that a sum of Rs.46,221/- had wrongly been paid 
to the respondent as he was put on a wrong scale of pay. It is that amount which is 
now sought to be recovered. 

3.	The respondent herein filed a writ petition questioning the said action on the part of 
the appellants herein. The said amount was sought to be recovered by way of an 
adjustment from the amount of gratuity payable to the respondent. 

4.	The appellants did not file any counter affidavit before the High Court. The High 
Court by reason of the impugned judgment not only directed the appellants to return 
the said sum of Rs. 46,221/- to the respondent forthwith, but also imposed a costs of 
Rs. 25,000/- as compensation for illegally encroaching upon his right to gratuity. The 
appellants are, thus, before us. 

5.	There cannot be any doubt, whatsoever, that all administrative bodies are entitled to 
rectify their mistake and for the said purpose, if an administrative order is required to 
be passed, they are not denuded therefrom. 

6.	The respondent herein, however, has retired from service in 1997.  He was otherwise 
entitled to the amount of gratuity.  The amount of gratuity should not, ordinarily, 
have been withheld. We, therefore, are of the opinion that interest of justice would be 
subserved if we exercise our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India 
and direct the appellants to comply with the High Court's order and at the same time 
set aside that portion of the High Court's order whereby the appellants herein have 
been asked to pay a sum of Rs.25,000/- to the respondent, as compensation for illegally 
encroaching upon his right to gratuity. It is directed accordingly. The appellants, thus, 
shall not recover the amount of Rs.46,221/- from the respondent. 
7.	The appeal is disposed of accordingly. 

