
Supreme Court of India
Bokka Subba Rao vs Kukkala Balakrishna &amp; Ors on 12 February, 2008Author: T Chatterjee
Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Dalveer Bhandari
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1245 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Bokka Subba Rao

RESPONDENT:
Kukkala Balakrishna &amp; Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/02/2008

BENCH:
Tarun Chatterjee &amp; Dalveer Bhandari

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T 

	CIVIL APPEAL NO 1245 OF 2008
(Arising out of S.L.P.) No.3228 of 2006)


TARUN CHATTERJEE, J.
1.	Leave granted.
2.	At the time of issuing notice to the special leave 
petition, this Court confined notice as to why the second 
appeal should not be remitted to the High Court for failure 
to formulate and decide the substantial question of law as 
required by Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure. 
3.	A suit was filed by the plaintiffs-respondents for 
declaration that Item No.2 of the plaint schedule property 
was their absolute property, and for a perpetual injunction, 
restraining the respondents from obtaining possession of 
the said item. The suit was dismissed, which was affirmed 
in appeal. However, by the impugned judgment of the High 
Court passed in second appeal, the suit was decreed. 
Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment of the High 
Court of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad, a special leave 
petition has been filed in respect of which leave has already 
been granted. 
4.	Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
after examining the judgment of the High Court passed in 
the second appeal, we are of the view that the judgment in 
second appeal of the High Court is liable to be set aside on 
a very short question. It is now well settled by catena of 
decisions of this Court that the High Court in second appeal, 
before allowing the same, ought to have formulated the 
substantial questions of law and thereafter, to decide the 
same on consideration of such substantial questions of law. 
In this case, admittedly no such substantial question of law 
had been formulated and thereafter, the second appeal was 
allowed. That being the position, we set aside the judgment 
of the High Court passed in second appeal and remit the 
appeal back to the High Court for fresh decision after 
formulating the substantial questions of law and thereafter, 
to decide it on merits.
5.	For the reasons aforesaid, the judgment of the High 
Court is set aside. The second appeal is restored to its 
original file. The High Court is requested to dispose of the 
second appeal at an early date preferably within six months 
from the date of supply of a copy of this order to it. We 
make it clear that we have not gone into the merits of the 
appeal which shall be decided after formulating the 
substantial questions of law and then to decide the second 
appeal in accordance with law.
6.	The appeal is, therefore, allowed to the extent 
indicated above. There will be no order as to costs.

