
Supreme Court of India
Forbes Forbes Campbell &amp; Co. Ltd vs Board Of Trustees, Port Of Bombay on 14 February, 2008Author: J H.K.Sema
Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2134 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Forbes Forbes Campbell &amp; Co. Ltd

RESPONDENT:
Board of Trustees, Port of Bombay

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 14/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2134 OF 2006

H.K.SEMA,J


1.		This appeal is preferred by the second defendant in 
the suit. 
                Brief Facts:
2.		The appellant-defendant is a steamer agent of the 
vessel S.S.President Madison.  The vessel was owned by a 
foreign company by the name American President Lines Ltd. 
One  M/s Metal Fabs India Pvt. Ltd. (First Defendant) was a 
consignee  of seven cartons of ball bearings which landed in 
the Port of Bombay on 5.2.1972 being carried by a vessel S.S. 
President Madison.   The goods remained uncleared for a 
period of over two months from the date of landing.  The Port 
Trust of Bombay (plaintiff) by a letter dated 10.10.1974 
addressed to the appellant requested to furnish the name and 
address of the consignee.  As no reply was received from the 
appellant, by a further letter dated 12.10.1974, the plaintiff 
(respondent herein) served a notice of sale upon the appellant 
with a request to issue the same to the ultimate consignee by 
R.P.A.D.  As no action was taken, the respondent by its notice 
dated 11.5.1975 informed the appellant that the goods were 
lying uncleared in the warehouse and if the same were not 
cleared within 10 days on payment of charges thereof, the 
same would be sold in auction.   As no action was forthcoming 
from the appellant despite notice and correspondences, as 
stated above, the plaintiff/respondent sold the goods in a 
public auction on 2.9.1976 and realized an amount of 
Rs.62,000/- as sale proceeds.  The plaintiff found that after 
deduction of the due amount such as port charges, custom 
duty etc. an amount of Rs.4752/- was still due and payable to 
them.

3.		The plaintiff filed R.C.S.No.2212/2911 of 1979 in 
the Court of Small Causes at Bombay for recovery of the 
aforesaid amount of Rs.4752/-.
4.		Defendant no.1 consignee did not contest the suit 
though served.  However, on being served the appellant 
(defendant No. 2) filed a written statement on 6.11.1979.  In 
the written statement it was inter alia contended that 
defendant no.2 has no liability to clear the landed goods and 
that the second defendant was not concerned with the goods 
remaining uncleared, as alleged.  It was further contended 
that the plaintiff has been negligent in not auctioning the 
goods immediately and waiting for four years before 
completing the sale.  It was further claimed that the liability to 
meet the claim of the plaintiff was only upon the consignee, 
namely, defendant no.1.  It was further the case that  
defendant no.2 was not the owner of the goods and, therefore, 
defendant no.2 was not liable to pay the deficit in the sale 
proceeds.
5.		Both the parties led evidence before the Trial Court 
and also produced relevant materials.  The Trial Court after 
perusing the documents and evidence on record and after 
hearing the parties dismissed the suit against defendant no.2.  
The appeal filed by the plaintiff before the full Court of Court 
of Small Causes was allowed by the judgment and order dated 
7.11.1989.  In the interregnum writ petition came to be filed.  
A Special Leave Petition was filed before this Court and was 
remanded by this Court with which we are not concerned.   
6.		On the first blush since the amount towards the 
storage charges was only to the extent of Rs.4752/- we 
thought of dismissing the appeal with a question of law left 
open.
7.		However, having regard to the questions of law of 
public importance involving in this appeal, which are of a 
recurring nature, the matter needs to be considered in depth.
8.		The questions of law of public importance in this 
appeal are as follows:-
1.	Whether a steamer agent can be construed 
as owner of the goods carried in his 
principal's vessel within the definition of 
owner in relation to goods under Section 
2(o) of the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963?

2.	Whether a steamer agent at all can be made 
liable for payment of storage 
charges/demurrage, which are uncleared 
by the consignee, even where steamer agent 
has not issued delivery order?

3.	In the event a steamer agent is held liable, 
to what extent he is liable and whether it 
absolves the respondent from acting 
promptly under Section 61 of 62 of the Act? 

9.              On behalf of the appellant, Mr. R. Venketeshwaran, 
learned senior counsel, contended that the appellant was not 
the owner of the goods within the meaning of Section 2(o) of the 
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963 (in short the Act) and, therefore, 
the appellant could not be made liable to pay any amount due 
in respect of the goods.  In this connection, reliance has been 
placed on the judgment rendered by a three-judge Bench of this 
Court in the case of Trustees of the Port of Madras through 
its Chairman      vs.    K.P.V. Sheikh Mohd. Rowther &amp; Co. 
Pvt. Ltd. (1997) 10 SCC 285, wherein this Court while 
approving the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court 
in M/s. K.P.V. Sheik Mohamed Rowthar   vs.  The Trustees 
of Port of Madras, ILR (1975) Vol. 1 Madras 59 held that the 
demurrage charges have to be collected by the Port Trust only 
from the consignee and not from the steamer agent.  After 
reading the aforesaid judgment, we doubted the correctness of 
the said judgment and we are unable to persuade ourselves to 
accept the ratio laid down in the aforesaid judgment of this 
Court.   
10.		Per contra Mr. T.R. Andhyarujina, learned senior 
counsel, appearing for the respondent strenuously contended 
that the issues involved in the present case are squarely 
covered by the judgment rendered by a Constitution Bench of 
this Court in the case of The Trustees of the Port of Madras 
by its Chairman   vs.  K.P.V. Sheik Mohamed Rowther &amp; Co., 
1963 Supp.(2) SCR 915. 
11.          In that case it was held by this Court that the steamer 
agent is liable to pay the charges.  It may be pointed out that 
the said case was referred to before a three-judge Bench of this 
Court in Trustees of the Port of Madras through its 
Chairman (supra) and this Court distinguished the facts.  It 
may also be pointed out here that the facts before the 
Constitution Bench, in our view, did not relate to payment of 
demurrage and it was for charges for shore labour ordered by 
the steamer agents themselves.  Therefore, the decision 
rendered by the Constitution Bench, in our view, is 
distinguishable on facts with the facts of the present case.       
12.          Since, we have doubted the correctness of the decision 
rendered by a three-judge Bench of this Court in the case of 
Trustees of the Port of Madras through its Chairman (supra) 
and in view of the questions of law of public importance as 
framed above, involved in this appeal, this appeal may be 
referred to a larger bench, for an authoritative decision.  Let the 
matter be placed before the Hon'ble Chief Justice of India for 
appropriate orders.   

