
Supreme Court of India
Kabushiki Kaisha Toshiba vs Tosiba Appliances Co. &amp; Ors on 16 May, 2008Author: S Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
                                                                   REPORTABLE



                 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                  CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDCTION

             CIVIL APPEAL N1O. 3639                OF 2008

                 (Arising out of SLP (C) No.5542 of 2006)


Kabushiki Kaisha Toshiba                              ... Appellant

                                 Versus

TOSIBA Appliances Co. &amp; Ors.                          ... Respondents




                            JUDGMENT

S.B. Sinha, J.


1.    Leave granted.


INTRODUCTION


2.    Jurisdiction of a Registrar of Trade Mark to remove the registered

mark from the register maintained by it on the ground of non-use as
                                   2

contained in Section 46 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 is

the question involved in this appeal which arises out of a judgment and

order dated 8.12.2005 passed by a Division Bench of the Calcutta High

Court dismissing an appeal being CAL No.573 arising out of a judgment

and order dated 28.9.1993 passed by a learned Single Judge of the High

Court affirming the final order dated 24.2.1992 passed by the Deputy

Registrar, Trade Marks.


BACKGROUND FACTS


3.    The factual matrix obtaining herein shorn of all unnecessary details is

as under :


      Appellant claims itself to be the largest manufacturer of Heavy

Electrical apparatus in Japan. The establishment started in the name of

Shibaura Engineering Works in the year 1857. In 1890, Hakunetshu-Sha

and Company Ltd. established the first plant for electric incandescent lamps

in Japan.    It later on diversified its product into consumer products.

Hakunetshu-Sha and Co. Ltd. was renamed as Tokyo Electric Company in

the year 1899. Shibaura Engineering Works Company Ltd. merged with

Tokyo Electric Company to form Tokyo Shibaura Electric Company in the

year 1939. However, the name of the company was changed to Kabushiki
                                   3

Kaisha Toshiba (for short, TOSHIBA).         Appellant adopted the mark

TOSHIBA in which `TO' was taken from the Tokyo and `SHIBA' was

taken from the word Shibaura.


4.    An application was filed for registration of eight items of electrical

apparatuses which fall in Class 07 of the Rules framed under the 1958 Act

being :


            "Current generators, induction motors (electric),
            electric    washing      machines,     compressors
            (machinery) and electric tool set consisting of
            electric drills (machines), spin dryers and can
            openers being electrically operated tools, all being
            goods include in class 7."

5.    Registration was granted in respect of the said items being Trade

Mark No.273758. Other registeration numbers were given in favour of the

said group in respect of some other goods falling under Class IX and XI.




6.    Respondent herein is an Indian company. It claims to have been

carrying on business of various electrical appliances and marketing auto

irons, toasters, washing machine, extension cords, table lamps, etc. under

the trademark TOSIBA since 1975.
                                   4
7.    The following chart will show the range of goods registered in favour

of TOSHIBA and which had been sought to be rectified by the respondent :



     "Mark     Registration Date Clas            Goods
                Number            s
Toshiba (Logo)   160442 5.9.1953  9   Scientific,      nautical,
                                      surveying &amp; electrical
                                      apparatus, etc.

Tosiba (Logo)       160443     5.9.1953    11    Installations for cooking,
                                                 refrigerating,     drying,
                                                 ventilating, water supply
                                                 and sanitary purposes

TOSHIBA             273758     26.7.1971    7    Current       generators,
                                                 induction         motors
                                                 (electrical),     electric
                                                 washing machines, etc.

TOSHIBA             273759     26.7.1971    9    Various electronics &amp;
                                                 electrical goods falling in
                                                 Cl.9.

TOSHIBA             273760     26.7.1971 11      Various goods including
                                                 lamps,     ovens, water
                                                 heaters, fans, toasters,
                                                 cookers, etc."




8.    It is stated that the appellant had since acquired about 35 trade marks

registrations in India. The period of seven years expired in 1978. On the
                                    5

expiry thereof, it became conclusive of its validity in terms of Section 32 of

the Act. The said registration has been extended from time to time. It has

been extended upto 2016.


9.    In the year 1984, the name of the Tokyo Shibaura Electric Company

was changed to Kabushiki Kaisha Toshiba (Toshiba Corporation). The said

change was also duly incorporated in the trademarks register.


      On the premise that the respondent which had although not been

producing or marketing washing machines or spin dryers, but has been

using the trade name, which was deceptively similar to that of the appellant,

a lawyer's notice was served upon it, stating:


             "The trade mark TOSHIBA is such a well known
             trade mark in India and abroad that its use or the
             use of a phonetic equivalent mark in respect of
             electronic and electrical goods would cause
             immense confusion and deception amongst the
             purchasing public and the trade.
             Our clients were surprised when they recently
             learnt of the adoption and use of the mark
             TOSIBA both as your trade mark and an essential
             feature of your trading style in respect of a range
             of electrical goods including electric irons.
             The adoption of the mark TOSIBA is clearly mala
             fide and amounts to infringement of our clients'
             various registered trade marks including numbers
             160443 and 273760.
                                   6
            The word TOSIBA is phonetically and visually
            similar to our clients' trade mark TOSHIBA and
            by the use of the said mark in respect of electrical
            goods, you are likely to cause immense confusion
            and deception amongst the purchasing public and
            the trade."

10.   Respondent was called upon to desist from using the trademark

TOSIBA in respect of electrical goods including electric irons or any other

goods whatsoever. No reply thereto was given.



PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE REGISTRAR



11.   It, however, filed an application purported to be under Section 46 and

56 of the Act read with Rule 94 of the Rules before the Registrar, Trade

Marks which was marked as Application No. CAL No.573, praying for

rectification of the said registered trade mark No.273758 in Class 7

alleging:


            "7. That the petitioners are using the mark
            TOSIBA in respect of Domestic Electrical
            Appliances viz. Auto Irons, Non-Auto Irons,
            Ovens, Toasters, Immersion Rods, Extension
            Cords, Table Lamps and Airy Fans etc. in class 9
            since the year 1975. The mark in question offends
            against the provisions of section of the Trade and
            Merchandise Marks Act on the date of
                                  7

            commencement of the proceedings between the
            parties.
            8.     That the mark sought to be removed was not
            on the commencement of the proceedings,
            distinctive of the goods of the Registered
            proprietor.
            9.     That the mark also offends Section 11(e) of
            the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, being dis-
            entitled to protection in a Court of Law.
            10. That the applicants are aggrieved parties as
            they have been served with a notice dated 24th
            April 1989 on behalf of the respondents to
            discontinue the use of the word TOSIBA which
            the petitioners adopted in the year 1975. They
            have been threatened with action under various
            provisions of Trade and Merchandise Marks Act
            and also under Article 36A of the Monopoly and
            Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 alleging
            unfair trade practices. The respondents have no
            business in India.
            The threats made were unjustified. That the
            petitioners even approached the respondents
            attorneys for not to interfere with their long-
            standing business, but without any result, hence
            the petitioner are the aggrieved party within the
            meaning of Section 56 of Trade and Merchandise
            Marks Act competent to file the present petition."
      Two other applications were also filed for rectification of two other

trade marks wherewith we are not concerned.


12.   Appellant filed a suit in the Delhi High Court against the respondent

praying for a decree for permanent injunction for using the mark TOSIBA
                                     8

or any other deceptively similar mark in respect of electrical goods

including electric irons, immersion rods, toasters, table lamps, ovens and

stoves. The said suit is still pending.


13.    In its affidavit before the Registrar of Trade Marks, the appellant

contended:


             "14. Annexed to my affidavit and marked
             Annexure H are extracts from the Import and
             Export Policy of the Government of India
             (Ministry of Commerce) for the years:
i)     April 1985 to March 1988;
ii)    April 1988 to March 1991;
iii)   April 1990 to March 1992.
             Thus, the import and export policies for the period
             April 1985 to March 1991 show that electric
             motors, compressors and generators fall under
             Appendix 3 Part A of the policy which is a list of
             limited permissible items for which the import is
             not free but only against a licence.
             Washing machines being consumer goods fall
             under Appendix 2 part B which is the list of
             restricted items.
             It is, therefore, evident that the import of goods
             covered by registration No.273758 is not free but
             restricted."
                                    9
14.   By reason of an order dated 12.5.1992, the Deputy Registrar of Trade

Marks partially allowed the application for rectification filed by the

respondent being Application No.CAL.573 and directed that the register of

Trade Mark be rectified by deleting the goods `washing machines' and `spin

dryers' from Trade Mark No.273758 in Class 7. Rectification was also

directed on the other applications filed by the respondent being CAL-574

and 575.



APPEAL BEFORE THE HIGH COURT



15.   An appeal was preferred thereagainst before the Calcutta High Court

in terms of Section 109 of the Act. Appeals were also preferred against

orders in respect of Class 9 and Class 11 registrations. The said appeal was

allowed in part by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta by

an order dated 28.9.1993, upholding the order of the Deputy Registrar so far

as the application related to Section 46(1)(a) of the Act but rejected the plea

as regards Section 46(1)(b) thereof, holding:


             "The first point to my mind which should be
             disposed of is the point as to the locus standi of
             Mr. Gupta's client. It is the admitted position that
             until now the respondents have manufactured and
             sold articles only in class 11, and those are
             household electrical articles like electric iron, fan
                      10

and toaster.   They sell these under the mark
`TOSIBA'.
It is not that the respondent has manufactured   or
sold washing machines or spin dryers at all      or
even that they have any finalized plans for      so
commencing the manufacture or sale of any        of
these items.
In a paper book running to no fewer than 725
pages, not to mention a comparatively slim
supplementary paper book, the only place where a
connection between the respondent and washing
machines or spin dryers is mentioned is at page
542, where it is recorded as stated before the
Deputy Registrar in his order that the respondent
also deals in some goods falling in class 7 such as
washing machines and spin dryers and some other
allied goods. If that statement was made before
the deputy registrar, then that was a misstatement.
   XXX                XXX                XXX
The mark of the appellant `TOSHIBA' and the
status of the said word as a registrable mark is
beyond dispute.     It is almost admittedly an
invented word, a hybrid between the name of the
city Tokyo and the name of the company of origin,
Shibaura.
It is also in my opinion beyond dispute that the
mark `TOSIBA' is so similar to the mark
`TOSHIBA' as to give the appellant an
indisputable right to call upon the respondent to
cease to use that mark in relation to goods for
which the appellant is registered, in case such
registration can be maintained by the appellant on
the register."
                              (emphasis supplied)
                                     11
16.   However, with regard to the contention of the appellant that the

respondent was not a person aggrieved or that the Registrar should not have

used its discretionary jurisdiction, the learned judge held:


             "If a person obtains a registration at a time when
             the mark, according to his own estimate, is
             economically unusable, then he cannot be said to
             have had a bona fide intention at the time of
             registration that the mark should be used in
             relation to the goods. If, however, he waits and
             watches the market of the country in which he
             wishes to have registration, and then, as soon as
             the restriction is lifted, he obtains registration
             without delay, he can indeed then be said to have a
             bona fide intention that the goods should be used
             in the market in question.
                    It is possible that if he waits for so long as
             that, he will no longer be able to get his
             registration at all, for another trader within the
             country might well have used up his name by then
             for the same goods. This is an unpreventable
             hazard. The trade mark law is a national code and
             not an international treaty, speaking broadly. If a
             country blocks international trade within itself,
             international names only cannot be registered and
             preserved in the blocked market. This would
             mean allowing international names to hold the
             market totally without goods, or give international
             marks a copyright value, and both these are
             impermissible and against the first principles of
             trade mark law.
                    It cannot therefore in my opinion be said
             that in 1971 the appllenats had a bona fide
             intention that the goods, namely, washing
             machines and spin dryers, should be traded in
             India under their trade mark `TOSIBA'. Without
                                     12

            the economic restrictions being lifted from the
            Indian market, trading, according to themselves,
            was and continued to be an unprofitable
            proposition.     Such lack of intention can be
            gathered from the admitted stand taken by the
            appellant before me, and in the registry, where it
            was the respondent.          The onus upon the
            respondent in appeal to show such lack of
            intention is thus fully discharged."

      The contention of the appellant was rejected, opining:

            "Mr. Gupta has conceded even from the time of
            the interlocutory application was heard in aid of
            this appeal that the order of the Deputy Registrar
            is to be so read as to restrict the rectification to the
            two items of washing machines and spin dryers
            only and it should not be read as the rectification
            application succeeding for the entire class.
            With recording of such concession, I dismiss the
            appeal but I do it on grounds of my own which I
            have mentioned above and not necessarily on the
            grounds given by the Deputy Registrar. The
            respondents would entitle to the costs of this
            appeal."

      It was furthermore held that the special circumstances mentioned

under sub-section (3) of Section 46 were not applicable.

17.   An intra court appeal was preferred thereagainst.        Cross-objections

were also filed by the respondent on the pleas that the mark should also be
                                      13

rectified under Section 46(1)(b), i.e., no bona fide use for a continuous

period of five years and one month.


IMPUGNED JUDGMENT


18.   By reason of the impugned judgment dated 8.12.2005, the said appeal

was dismissed holding that the respondent was a person aggrieved, stating:


            "The purpose of introducing the expression
            `person aggrieved' in the statute is obviously to
            prevent action from persons who are interfering
            only from merely sentimental notions or personal
            vengeance and act as mere common informers.
            But in case where one trader, by means of having a
            trade mark wrongly registered in his name,
            narrows the area of business open to his rivals, in
            that case the rival is a person aggrieved. It may be
            that the rival is not immediately carrying on the
            trade. But if there is a reasonable possibility for
            the rival to carry on that trade in future in view of
            his presently carrying on a trade in the same class
            of goods then the rival trader is a person
            aggrieved. In other words, if a person or a
            corporation is in the trade of the same class of
            goods along with the company which has got a
            mark registered in its name and is thus the
            hampered in the possible expansion of his trade in
            that case the person or the corporation is a person
            aggrieved.'



19.   The question as to whether requirements of Section 46(1)(a) of the

Act were fulfilled or not was answered thus :
                                     14
             "Here the date of registration was 26.7.1971 and
             the date of rectification application was 30.5.1989.
             In between there has been no use of the concerned
             goods by the registered proprietor except one
             advertisement which has already not been
             accepted by this Court as an instance of use.
             Therefore, in the facts of this case, the order of the
             Deputy Registrar of rectification by deletion of
             two items namely electric washing machine and
             spin dryers from the registered Trade Mark
             No.273758 in Class 7 goods is quite justified. It
             appears that the registration in favour of the
             appellant in Class 7 goods was in respect of
             various other goods and out of those goods only
             two have been deleted.
             This is quite permissible and is within the object
             and scope of Section 46 of the said Act."

20.   The Division Bench of the High Court did not go into the contention

of the respondent that the appellant was not entitled to any relief in terms of

Section 46(1)(b), stating :


             "The learned Counsel for the respondents on the
             basis of the cross appeal has urged that the
             appellants are not entitled to the relief under
             Section 46(1)(b). But in view of the facts of this
             case which make the case against the appellants
             under Section 46(1)(a) so very clear that this Court
             need not decide the said cross appeal in any detail.
             This Court is of the view that the decision of the
             learned Judge under Section 46(1)(a) was right
             and the rectification which has been ordered by
             the Registrar cannot be interfered with."
                                    15
CONTENTIONS


21.   Mr. F.S. Nariman, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

appellant, would urge:


1)    Respondent having not been dealing with either washing machine or

      spin dryer, was not a `person aggrieved' within the meaning of

      Section 46 of the Act.


2)    The statutory scheme must be gathered from reading the provisions of

      Section 46, 47 and 56 conjointly and so read it would be evident that

      as the appellant having been found to have abandoned its right to

      continue to be registered, it should have been held that the

      requirements under Section 46(1)(a) have also not been fulfilled.


3)    The name `TOSHIBA' being well known and the word being an

      innovated one, although not directly but the spirit of the provisions of

      Section 47 should have been considered by the Registrar in exercise

      of its discretionary jurisdiction under the Act, particularly when no

      public interest was found to be involved.


22.   Mr. Ajay Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent, on the other hand, would urge:
                                    16

(1)   The application for rectification being a composite one being under

      both Sections 46 and 56, the respondent was a person aggrieved, as

      envisaged under sub-section (2) of Section 56 of the Act.


(2)   In any event, the appellant having served the respondent with a notice

      of action, it was a `person aggrieved'.


(3)   The matter having remained pending for 19 years during which

      period, the appellant having not been able to obtain any order of stay

      from any court and/or having not entered into any arrangement for

      using its registered mark in India either by itself or through an Indian

      company, the impugned judgment should not be interfered with.




(4)   The distinction between clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of

      Section 46 being clear and explicit, it is idle to contend that only

      because the respondent's claim under the latter clause has been

      negatived, its claim under clause (a) would also necessary fail.


(5)   The provisions of Section 45 of the Act should be kept in mind while

      interpreting Sections 46 and 56 of the Act.


Statutory Provsions
                                   17
23.   Chapter VI of the 1958 Act deals with use of trade mark and

registered users. Section 45 provides for proposed use of trade mark by

company to be formed.       Section 46 is in two parts.     It is subject to

provisions of Section 47. In terms of the said provision, the registered mark

may be taken off the register in respect of any of the goods for which it was

registered on application made in the prescribed manner by any person

aggrieved on the grounds envisaged either clause (a) or (b). Section 47,

however, provided for a defense registration of well known trade marks;

sub-section (1) whereof reads as under :


            "Section 47 - Removal from register and
            imposition of limitations on ground of non-use.
            (1) A registered trade mark may be taken off the
            register in respect of the goods or services in
            respect of which it is registered on application
            made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar or
            the Appellate Board by any person aggrieved on
            the ground either--
            (a) that the trade mark was registered without any
                bona fide intention on the part of the
                applicant for registration that it should be
                used in relation to those goods or services by
                him or, in a case to which the provisions of
                section 46 apply, by the company concerned
                or the registered user, as the case may be, and
                that there has, in fact, been no bona fide use
                of the trade mark in relation to those goods or
                services by any proprietor thereof for the time
                being up to a date three months before the
                date of the application; or
                                     18
             (b) that up to a date three months before the date
                 of the application, a continuous period of five
                 years from the date on which the trade mark
                 is actually entered in the register or longer
                 had elapsed during which the trade mark was
                 registered and during which there was no
                 bona fide use thereof in relation to those
                 goods or services by any proprietor thereof
                 for the time being:
             Provided that except where the applicant has been
             permitted under section 12 to register an identical
             or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of the
             goods or services in question, or where the
             tribunal is of opinion that he might properly be
             permitted so to register such a trade mark, the
             tribunal may refuse an application under clause (a)
             or clause (b) in relation to any goods or services, if
             it is shown that there has been, before the relevant
             date or during the relevant period, as the case may
             be, bona fide use of the trade mark by any
             proprietor thereof for the time being in relation
             to--
             (i) goods or services of the same description; or
             (ii) goods or services associated with those goods
                  or services of that description being goods or
                  services, as the case may be, in respect of
                  which the trade mark is registered."

24.   Chapter VII of the Act provides for rectification and correction of the

register. Section 57 confers a power upon the Registrar to cancel or vary

the registration and to rectify the registrar, inter alia, on the ground of any

contravention or failure to observe a condition entered on the register in
                                    19

relation thereto. Sub-section (2) of Section 57 provides that any person

aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry, or by

any entry made in the register without sufficient cause or by any entry

wrongly remained on the register or by any remedy or defect in any entry in

the register may apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar and the

Tribunal may make such order for canceling or varying the entry as it thinks

fit.


       The Central Government, in exercise of its rule making power, made

rules known as Trade Marks Rules, 1959. The Fourth Schedule appended

to the Rules classified different products; Class 7 whereof reads as under:


                          "THE FOURTH SCHEDULE

              Classification of Goods - Names of the Classes

             (Parts of an article or apparatus are, in general,
             classified with the actual article apparatus, except
             where such part constitutes articles included in
             other classes).

             1 to 6 ...

             7.     Machines and machine tools; motors
             (except for vehicles); machine couplings and
             belting (except for vehicles); large size
             agricultural implements; incubators."

Statutory Interpretation/Application
                                     20
25.   The Act is a complete Code in itself. Section 6 of the Act provides

for the maintenance of a record called register of trademarks.


26.   Indisputably, application for registration of the trademark filed by the

appellant herein had been allowed way back in 1971 in respect of the items

mentioned in the registration certificates.


27.   Respondent was not in picture at that point of time. It, however,

obtained registration in respect of certain products which fall in Classes 7

and 11.


28.   Chapter IV of the Act provides for the effect of registration. When a

trade mark is infringed, the consequences laid down under Section 29 would

ensue. Section 32 provides for the registration to be conclusive as regards

the validity after seven years. Indisputably, the appellant, after expiry of the

validity of a period of seven years, had been getting its registration renewed

from time to time. Chapter V provides for assignment and transmission. It

is not necessary to notice any of the provision contained in the said Chapter

as admittedly, the appellant has not assigned the same in favour of any

person or granted any licence in respect thereof.
                                     21
      Chapter VI provides for use of trade mark and registered users.

Section 45 provides for proposed use of trade mark by company to be

formed. Chapter VI, inter alia, lays down the guidelines as regards the

mode and manner in which the trade mark can be used. Section 45 provides

for proposed use of trade mark by company to be formed which is indicative

of the fact that the plan to obtain registration of a trade mark may begin

even before the company is formed. Section 47 provides for defensive

registration of well known trade marks; such defensive registration was,

however, not resorted to by the appellant herein.


29.   As noticed hereinbefore, appellant contended that the said provision

should also be taken into consideration for proper constructions of Section

46 of the Act to which we shall advert to a little later. Section 48 provides

for the registered users. Whenever the user's right to use a trademarked is

assigned or a licence is given to any third party, the user by the assignee or

the licensee to the benefit of the register to the person who has obtained the

registration.


30.   Apart from Section 46, the power of rectification and correction of

the register is also contained in Section 56 of the Act.


Construction of the Statute
                                       22
31.   In the aforementioned backdrop of the statutory provisions, we are

called upon to interpret clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 46

of the Act.


      It is beyond any doubt or dispute that sub-section (1) of Section 46

confers a discretionary jurisdiction on the Registrar. The jurisdiction may

be exercised if any application is filed by a person aggrieved. The said

application has to be filed in the manner prescribed therefor. Whence it is

found that the application is filed by a person aggrieved in the prescribed

manner, the grounds which would be available to the Registrar for exercise

of its discretionary jurisdiction are stated in clauses (a) and (b) of sub-

section (1) of Section 46. We may, at the outset, notice that clauses (a) and

(b) are disjunctive and not cumulative. Recourse may be taken to either of

them or both of them. A combined application even under Section 46 and

56 of the Act is permissible in law.


32.   Whereas clause (a) refers to bona fide use of the trade mark; clause

(b) stipulates the period upto a date of one month before the date of

application, a continuous period of five years or longer elapsed during

which the trade mark was registered and during which there was no bona

fide use thereof in relation to those goods by any proprietor thereof for the

time being.    Sub-section (3) postulates an exclusion clause as regards
                                     23

application of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 46 if any non-use of a

trade mark which is shown to have been due to special circumstances in the

trade or not to any intention to abandon or not to use the trade mark in

relation to the goods to which the application relates.


33.   No doubt, a statute is required to be read as a whole, Chapter by

Chapter, Section by Section and clause by clause. However, the purpose

for which clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 46 on the one

hand and sub-section (3) thereof, vis-`-vis Section 56 of the Act on the

other have been enacted require consideration. The appeared to have been

enacted for different purposes.


ANALYSIS


34.   We may now consider the three-fold submission of Mr. Nariman that:


i)    the Registrar has not exercised its jurisdiction under Section 56 of the

      Act;


ii)   the learned Single Judge while exercising its appellate jurisdiction

      has found that no case has been made out for invoking clause (b) of

      sub-section (1) of Section 46; and
                                      24
iii)   The trade mark consists of an invented word and is very well known

       in the international market.


       The basis of the said submission, thus, appear to be two-fold:


(1)    As there is no evidence that the appellant had any intention to

       abandon the use of the said trademark, as a logical corollary thereof,

       the High Court ought to have held that the appellant had the intention

       of bona fide use of the trade mark not only at a point of time when an

       application for registration was filed but also continuously thereafter;


(2)    The provisions of clauses (a) and (b), if read in the aforementioned

       context, sub-section (3) of Section 46 would also come into play

       particularly when the words `non-use' therein and clause (a) of sub-

       section (1) are identical, namely `not to have any intention to abandon

       or not to use the trade mark in relation to the goods to which the

       application relates' and save and except in clause (a), the word `bona

       fide' has been added.


35.    We do not find any force in the aforementioned submission. Clauses

(a) and (b) operate in different fields. Sub-section (3) covers a case falling

within clause (b) and not the clause (a) thereof. Had the intention of the

Parliament been that sub-section (3) covers cases falling both under clause
                                    25
(b) and clause (a), having regard to the similarity of the expressions used,

there was no reason as to why it could not be stated so explicitly.


36.   If the submission of Mr. Nariman is to be accepted, the result thereof

would be that for all intent and purport, no distinction would exist in the

situations covered by clause (b) and clause (a) except that whereas in the

former no period is mentioned, in the latter a specific period is provided.


37.   There may be a case where owing to certain special circumstances, a

continuous use is not possible. The trade mark for which registration is

obtained is used intermittently. Such non-user for a temporary period may

be due to any exigency including a bar under a statute, or a policy decision

of the Government or any action taken against the registrant.


38.   Moreover, in cases of intermittent use, clause (b) shall not apply.

[See M/s. Plaza Chemical Industries v. Kohinoor Chemicals Co. Ltd. [AIR

1975 Bombay 191]; Express Bottlers Services Pvt. Ltd. v. Pepsico Inc &amp;

Ors. [1988 (1) CLJ 337]; Bali Trade Mark (Rectification Ch.D [1966 (16)

RPC 387]; Bali Trade Mark (Rectification C.A.) [(1968 (14) RPC 426]; and

"BULOVA" Trade Mark (Rectification Ch.D) [1967 (9) RPC 229].


39.   Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 46 takes within its sweep a

situation where registration has been obtained without any bona fide
                                       26

intention on the part of the registrant that it should be used in relation to

those goods by him and that there has, in fact, been no bona fide use.

Clause (a), therefore, provides for more than one contingency. Both the

pre-conditions laid down therein are required to be fulfilled and not the

contingency which is contemplated by clause (1).


      Furthermore, it is not a case where the appellant had taken recourse to

Section 47 of the Act.


40.   In American Home Products Corporation v. Mac Laboratories Pvt.

Ltd. &amp; Anr. [(1986 (1) SCC 465], this Court categorically noticed the

aforementioned distinction, stating:

            "32. Clause (b) of Section 46(1) applies where for
            a continuous period of five years or longer from
            the date of the registration of the trade mark, there
            has been no bona fide use thereof in relation to
            those goods in respect of which it is registered by
            any proprietor thereof for the time being. An
            exception to Clause (b) is created by Section 46
            (3). Under Section 46(3), the non-use of a trade
            mark, which is shown to have been due to special
            circumstances in the trade and not to any intention
            to abandon or not to use the trade mark in relation
            to the goods to which the application under
            Section 46(1) relates, will not amount to non-use
            for the purpose of Clause (b).
            33. The distinction between Clause (a) and Clause
            (b) is that if the period specified in Clause (b) has
            elapsed and during that period there has been no
                                     27

              bona fide use of. the trade mark, the fact that the
              registered proprietor had a bona fide intention to
              use the trade mark, at the date of the application
              for registration becomes immaterial and the trade
              mark is liable to be removed from the Register
              unless his case falls under Section 46(3), while
              under Clause (a) where there had been a bona fide
              intention to use the trade mark in respect of which
              registration was sought, merely because the trade
              mark had not been used for a period shorter than
              five years from the date of its registration will not
              entitle any person to have that trade mark taken off
              the Register."

41.    The intention to use a trade mark sought to be registered must be

genuine and real. When a trade mark is registered, it confers a valuable

right. It seeks to prevent trafficking in trade marks. It seeks to distinguish

the goods made by one person from those made by another. The person,

therefore, who does not have any bona fide intention to use the trade mark,

is not expected to get his product registered so as to prevent any other

person from using the same. In that way trafficking in trade mark is sought

to be restricted.


PERSON AGGRIEVED


42.    The concept of the term `person aggrieved' is different in the context

of Section 46 and 56. Section 46 speaks of a private interest while Section

56 speaks of a public interest. Respondent filed a composite application.
                                    28

Registrar did not think it fit to consider the case from the point of view of

public interest and confined the case to Section 56 of the Act, as would

appear from the fact that while sustaining the respondent's objection under

Section 46(1) and (b) on the ground that the same had not been used by the

appellant for the last twenty years, it was observed:


             "Having held that Section 46(1)(a) is a bar to the
             continuation of the impugned mark on the Register
             as above, I hold that the entry in respect of those
             goods for which the Registered Proprietors could
             not prove their user of the Registered Trade Mark
             273758 was wrongly made in the Register and is
             wrongly remaining on the Register under Section
             56(2) of the Act."

43.   Reference to Section 56(2) of the Act at that place appears to be a

typographical mistake. It is palpably wrong. No deliberation was made on

the said question. No fact or contention has been taken note of. There are

no discussions; no findings.


44.   The learned Single Judge found that the respondent No.1 had never

manufactured or sold washing machine and spin dryers at all. They did not

have even any plan for commencing the manufacture or sale thereof. It, in

that backdrop, was observed:
                                   29
            "If that statement was made before the Deputy
            Registrar, then that was a misstatement."


45.   Respondent, however was found to be a person aggrieved upon

taking into consideration a large number of decisions. It was held:


            "The respondent is anything but a common
            informer or an officious person. It deals in articles
            of class 11 and it uses the mark TOSIBA. If it
            were to go into the trade of washing machines or
            spin dryers, and if the mark TOSHIBA were to
            remain on the register, with the appellant as its
            proprietor, the respondent could not in that event,
            use its mark for washing machines and spin dryer
            too. This is enough, I think, to com to the
            conclusion without any hesitation that the
            respondent had a sufficient and impeachable locus
            standi to maintain the rectification application in
            the registry."

46.   The learned Single Judge as also the Division Bench referred to a

large number of decisions to hold that the respondent was the person

aggrieved within the meaning of Sections 46 and 56 of the Act. It is beyond

any doubt that the question has authentically been answered by a Division

Bench of this Court in Hardie Trading Ltd. &amp; Anr. v. Addisons Paint &amp;

Chemicals Ltd. [(2003) 11 SCC 92], holding

            "30. The phrase "person aggrieved" is a common
            enough statutory precondition for a valid
            complaint or appeal. The phrase has been
                       30

variously construed depending on the context in
which it occurs. Three sections viz. Sections 46,
56 and 69 of the Act contain the phrase. Section
46 deals with the removal of a registered
trademark from the register on the ground of non-
use. This section presupposes that the registration
which was validly made is liable to be taken off by
subsequent non-user. Section 56 on the other hand
deals with situations where the initial registration
should not have been or was incorrectly made. The
situations covered by this section include: - (a) the
contravention or failure to observe a condition for
registration; (b) the absence of an entry; (c) an
entry made without sufficient cause; (d) a wrong
entry; and (e) any error or defect in the entry. Such
type of actions are commenced for the "purity of
the register" which it is in public interest to
maintain. Applications under Sections 46 and 56
may be made to the Registrar who is competent to
grant the relief. "Person's aggrieved" may also
apply for cancellation or varying an entry in the
register relating to a certification trademark to the
Central Government in certain circumstances.
Since we are not concerned with a certification
trademark, the process for registration of which is
entirely different, we may exclude the
interpretation of the phrase "person aggrieved"
occurring in Section 69 from consideration for the
purposes of this judgment.
31. In our opinion the phrase "person aggrieved"
for the purposes of removal on the ground of non-
use under section 46 has a different connotation
from the phrase used in section 56 for cancelling
or expunging or varying an entry wrongly made or
remaining in the Register.
32. In the latter case the locus standi would be
ascertained liberally, since it would not only be
against the interest of other persons carrying on
                                    31

             the same trade but also in the interest of the public
             to have such wrongful entry removed."


Section 46(1)(b) issue


47.   Mr. Gupta would contend that the respondent is entitled to raise the

question of applicability of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 46

although no cross-objection has been filed, on the principles analogous to

Order XLI Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Strong reliance in this

behalf has been placed on Ravinder Kumar Sharma v. State of Assam &amp;

Ors. [(1999) (7) SCC 435]. We do not agree.


      Mr. Gupta himself submitted that clauses (a) and (b) of sub-section

(1) of Section 46 are in two different water tight compartments. It confers,

therefore, two remedies. The ingredients to establish that a case has been

made out for removal of the registration of the appellant from the register,

thus, are on separate grounds. If the High Court has refused to consider one

of the grounds, its right was affected to urge the applicability of clause (b)

being separate and distinct from the grounds on which contention can be

raised for applying the ingredients of clause (a) being wholly distinct and

different, the principles of Order XLI Rule 33 of the Code of Civil

Procedure, in our opinion, would not be applicable. The causes of action
                                   32

for invoking clauses (a) and (b) are different and, thus, when a composite

application is filed, only different causes of action are joined together. If

one cause of action fails, the remedy by way of appeal thereagainst must be

availed.


48.   Mr. Gupta submits that therein the application was filed under

Section 46 and not under Section 56 whereas grounds have been raised both

under Sections 46 and 56 of the Act.


49.   A situation of this nature has not been considered in any of the

precedents.    The original application filed by the respondent was

maintainable on three counts:


1.    Application of Section 46, both under clauses (a) and (b);


2.    Application of Section 56; and


3.    The common law principle that he had been served with a legal notice

      by the appellant desisting from using the word TOSIBA.


50.   It is difficult to hold that only because respondent had not been able

to prove one of the grounds, namely, applicability of Section 56 of the Act,

it loses its locus also. It would continue to be a person aggrieved even

within the purview of Section 46 of the Act as it was slapped with a notice
                                    33

of action and it had a cause of action. It had a remedy. It invoked the

jurisdiction of the Registrar on a large number of grounds. One of it was

accepted, others were not.


51.   The petition, therefore, which was maintainable, did not cease to be

so particularly when the respondent not only faced with a legal action but,

in fact, later on a suit has also been filed by the appellant against it. We

would leave the question at that.


Exercise of Discretional jurisdiction


52.   This brings us to the question as to whether it was a fit case where the

Registrar and consequently the High Court should have exercised its

discretionary jurisdiction.


      Sub-section (2) of Section 109 provides for an appeal from any order

or decision of the Registrar under the Act or the Rules made thereunder. An

appeal is to be heard by a learned Single Judge.        A further appeal is

provided before a Division Bench in terms of sub-section (5) of Section 109

of the Act. Appellate jurisdiction of the High Court is not restricted or

limited. Sub-section (6) of Section 109 stipulates that the High Court shall

have the power to make any order which the Registrar could make under the
                                    34

Act. In other words, if the Registrar exercises a discretionary jurisdiction,

the High Court while exercising its appellate jurisdiction would continue to

do so. The High Court having a plenary jurisdiction, thus, was not only

entitled to take into consideration the materials placed on record as also the

finding of the Registrar, but it could also arrive at its own finding on the

basis of the materials on record.


53.   For the said purpose, the basic admitted fact could have been taken

into consideration. It may be true that the appellant whether from the date

of registration, or from the date of order of rectification or even a post

rectification period did not use the registered trade mark. It did not enter

into any collaboration agreement with an Indian company. It did not grant

any licence to any other person to use the trade mark.


      We may, however, notice that at least in the year 1985 it had issued

an advertisement before any controversy arose. It renewed the registration

every seven years. Its registration stands extended upto 2016 A.D. It

specifically brought to the notice of the Registrar that it had been

maintaining service centres in India in respect of washing machines, stating:


             "Thus, to summarize:
                                   35
(a)   TOSHIBA has several joint venture agreements in India,
      for various products including VCRS, colour picture
      tubes, batteries. etc.
(b)   TOSHIBA has technical collaboration agreements for
      manufacture of various products in India including body
      scanners, ultra sound equipments, PIP televisions etc.
(c)   TOSHIBA has several service centres in India in the
      cities of New Delhi, Bombay, Madras, Calcutta, Baroda,
      Bhopal, Cochin, Kerala and Bangalore for repairing
      various electronic and electrical products including
      televisions, VCRS, ovens, music systems, washing
      machines etc.
(d)   TOSHIBA has sold several goods in India under the
      trade mark TOSHIBA including electric motors and
      accessories, generators, fax machine, whole body C.T.
      scanners &amp; ultrasound equipment, circuit breakers,
      transistors, integrated circuits, colour TV sets,
      engineering, samples and spare parts for televisions,
      VCRs, cassette recorders, microwave equipment and
      various other goods to actual users and authorized
      service centres."



      The learned Single Judge also noticed the said contention in the

following terms:


            "I come now to the two limbs of Section 46(1)(a).
            I propose to take up first the limb regarding use of
            the mark in relation to washing machines and spin
            dryers upto a date when one month prior to the
            rectification application.
            The only evidence of use of the mark, produced by
            the appellant, if use it can be called is at page 190
            of the paper-book which is an advertisement of a
            freezer and a washing machine of Toshiba
                                   36

            published on the 27th August 1985 in the Indian
            Express, New Delhi, also mentioning therein
            certain service centres.
            Now, this is no use of the mark in relation to the
            goods within the meaning of the Trade Marks
            Act."

      The Division Bench also did so, stating:

              "On the merits the learned Judge also found and
            this has not been disputed in appeal that the only
            evidence of the use of the registered mark
            produced by the appellant is an advertisement of a
            freezer and washing machine of Toshiba published
            on 27th August, 1985 in the Indian Express, New
            Delhi and in that advertisement there was mention
            of five service centres. The learned Judge also
            found that such a solitary advertisement is not use
            of the mark in relation to the goods within the
            meaning of Section 2(2)(b) of the Act. The
            learned Judge found that when there are no goods
            at all in physical existence, there can be no use of
            the mark in relation to those goods. The learned
            Judge also found that however, big or famous the
            establishment of the appellant may be, the use of
            the mark must be made in India and not abroad
            and that mere use of the mark for one
            advertisement is insufficient as use otherwise such
            a use may amount to trafficking in trade mark."

54.   Appellant had to maintain the service centres because although they

were not in a position to manufacture washing machines or spin dryers or

market the same because of the ban imposed by the Central Government,
                                     37

but it had been rendering the services to those who had been importing the

said machines. On the one hand, appellant had not been using its registered

trade mark effectively but on the other hand there was a finding that it did

not intend to abandon the said right. It intended to enforce its right under

the Act as against the respondent, suit was filed by it as far back as in the

year 1990. Mr. Gupta commented that the very fact that the appellant did

not obtain any order of injunction as against the respondent for more than

17 years itself indicates that it was not serious in pursuing its case before the

High Court.

55.   This is one side of the picture. The other side is that there has been

no injunction as against the respondent. It was free to market its products in

the name of TOSIBA.         It had also, however, not been manufacturing

washing machine and spin dryers. A finding of fact has been arrived at by

the learned Single Judge, which has not been overturned by the Division

Bench that the respondent never had any intention to manufacture the said

goods.


      The balancing act between the user of registered trade mark and non-

user should be such which leads to the possibility of neither of the parties

being injured. The learned Single Judge has also held :
                                    38
            "The mark of the appellant `TOSHIBA' and the
            status of the said word as a registrable mark is
            beyond dispute.     It is almost admittedly an
            invented word, a hybrid between the name of the
            city Tokyo and the name of the company of origin
            Shibaura.
            It is also in my opinion beyond dispute that the
            mark `TOSIBA' is so similar to the mark
            `TOSHIBA' as to give the appellant an
            indisputable right to call upon the respondent to
            cease to use that mark in relation to goods for
            which the appellant is registered, in case such
            registration can be maintained by the appellant on
            the register."

56.   There was delay on the part of the respondent in filing the application

under Section 46 of the Act. The delay, if any, on the part of the appellant

did not cause any harm to the respondent. It had been using the word

TOSIBA for such a long time without in any way being obstructed to do so

by reason of an order of the Court or otherwise.


57.   In the matter of The Trade Mark No.70,078 of Wright, Crossley, and

Co. [1898) 15 RPC 131], it was stated:

            "I think, notwithstanding what was said in that
            case, and has been said in other cases dealing with
            Trade Marks , that an applicant in order to show
            that he is a person aggrieved, must show that in
            some possible way he may be damaged or injured
            if the Trade Mark is allowed to stand; and by
                                   39

            `possible' I mean possible in a practical sense, and
            not merely in a fantastic view."

58.   It is this aspect of the matter which has been missed by the learned

Single Judge and the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court.


59.   We, therefore, are of the opinion that on this short ground, the

impugned judgment cannot be sustained. It is set aside accordingly. We

would, however, request the Delhi High Court to consider the desirability of

disposing of the suit filed by the appellant against the respondent as

expeditiously as possible. The appeal is allowed. No costs.



                                                   .............................J.
                                                   [S.B. Sinha]



                                                   .............................J.
                                                   [Lokeshwar Singh Panta]

New Delhi
May 16, 2008

