
Supreme Court of India
Laxmi Ram(Dead)By Lrs. &amp; Ors vs Bietshwar &amp; Ors on 29 August, 2008Author: ......................J.
Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                          CIVIL APPEAL NO.5348 OF 2008
                       (Arising out of S.L.P. (C) No.4998 of 2007)


Laxmi Ram (Dead) By L.R. and Ors.                 ...Appellant(s)

                                         Versus

Bietshwar Singh Ors.                                        ...Respondent(s)


                                     O R D E R

           Application for substitution is allowed.
           Leave granted.
           Heard learned counsel for the parties.
           By the impugned order, High Court has dismissed the second appeal on
the ground that no substantial question of law was involved therein.
           Having heard the parties and perused the records, we are of the view that
High Court was not justified in observing that no substantial question of law is
involved in the appeal. In our view, the following substantial questions of law do
arise in the second appeal:

              "(2) Whether the findings of the trial court on issue No.
              (VII) that Pokhani inherited the property as her husband
              Bifan Ram was the last male holder in the branch of Rucha
              Ram is based on error of record in appreciating averments
              made in paragraph 18 of the written statement which read
              with the averment made in paragraph 10 of the written
              statement makes out a clear case that Bifan Ram
              predeceased his father Rucha Ram, therefore
              inadvertently using the words
                                                                   ....2/-
                                          -2-
             that Bifan was the last male heirs becomes meaningless
             read with the further continuous statement in the same
             sentence that Bifan Ram was the last male heirs in the
             branch of Late Rucha Ram @ Rupa Ram who predeceased
             his father and thereafter Rucha Ram also died and
             thereafter entire property reverted back to the branch of
             Ramdhyan Ram?

             (3) Whether the findings on issue No.(vii) is vitiated in law
             for being influenced by an error of record and mis-
             appreciation and non-appreciation of evidences on the
             records as to who was the last male holder?"

The High Court should have framed the afore-mentioned substantial questions of law
and decided the same.
          In view of this, the appeal is allowed, impugned order is set aside and the
second appeal is remanded to the High Court. Upon such remand, the High Court
shall first frame the above-noted two substantial questions of law and decide the
second appeal afresh in accordance with law.
          It is needless to say that in case the High Court is of the view that any other
substantial question of law is involved in the appeal, such question may also be
framed and decided after giving opportunity of hearing to the parties.

                                                                         ......................J.
                                                [B.N. AGRAWAL]



                                                                         ......................J.
                                                [G.S. SINGHVI]
New Delhi,
August 29, 2008.

