
Supreme Court of India
Meerza Jamshed Baig vs State Of Andhra Pradesh on 8 April, 2008Bench: B.N. Agrawal, G.S. Singhvi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  599 of 2004

PETITIONER:
Meerza Jamshed Baig

RESPONDENT:
State of Andhra Pradesh

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 08/04/2008

BENCH:
B.N. AGRAWAL &amp; G.S. SINGHVI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O  R  D  E  R

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.599 OF 2004


	Heard learned counsel for the parties.
	The sole appellant, along with Meerza Harshad Ali Baig, Meerza Khadar 
Baig and Meerza Ansar Baig, was tried and by judgment rendered by the Trial 
Court, accused Meerza Khadar Baig and Meerza Ansar Baig were acquitted, whereas 
the appellant and Meerza Harshad Ali Baig were convicted under Section 302 of the 
Indian Penal Code [hereinafter referred to as the `I.P.C.'] and sentenced to undergo 
imprisonment for life and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- each; in default, to undergo further 
imprisonment for a period of three months.  Against the order of acquittal, the State 
of Andhra Pradesh filed an appeal before the High Court, whereas both the convicted 
accused persons, including the appellant, preferred an appeal against their conviction.  
The High Court dismissed the appeal filed on behalf of the State of Andhra Pradesh 
and confirmed the order of acquittal, whereas partly allowed the other appeal by 
acquitting Meerza Harshad Ali Baig of the charge.  So far as the appellant is 
concerned, his conviction under Section 302 I.P.C. has been confirmed.  Hence, this 
appeal by special leave.
....2/-

- 2 -
	Against the order of acquittal of other three accused persons, the State has 
not preferred any appeal.
	According to the prosecution case and evidence, there were only four 
accused persons and they indiscriminately assaulted with dagger Shaikh Abdul Azeez, 
who succumbed to injuries.  Dr. L.C. Obulesu [P.W.11] stated that death was caused 
as a result of cumulative effect of all the injuries.  Mohammed Syeed [P.W.1] stated, 
during the course of cross examination, that the appellant assaulted the deceased on 
the right shoulder.  The doctor in his evidence, has nowhere stated that the injury on 
the right shoulder, i.e., injury No.1, was a fatal one.  As the appellant cannot be said 
to have inflicted the fatal injury, the High Court was not justified in upholding his 
conviction under Section 302 I.P.C.  The appellant could not have been convicted 
under Section 302/34 I.P.C., as there was nobody else with whom he could have 
shared the common intention in view of the fact that there were only four accused 
persons, out of whom, three persons have been already acquitted.  In view of these 
facts, we are of the view that the High Court was not justified in upholding the 
conviction of the appellant.
	Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, conviction and sentence of the 
appellant are set aside and he is acquitted of the charge.  The appellant, who is in 
custody, is directed to be released forthwith, if not required in connection with any 
other case.

