
Supreme Court of India
Lahorimal Jethanand vs Managing Officer/Tahsildar, ... on 29 August, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                                                        1



                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CIVIIL APPEAL NO. 5322 OF 2008
     (Arising out of SLP(C)No.3331 OF 2006)


LAHORIMAL JETHANAND                                            ...    APPELLANT(S)

                                         :VERSUS:

MANAGING OFFICER/TAHSILDAR, JALNA AND ORS.                     ...    RESPONDENT(S)




                                         ORDER

                   Leave granted.

                   The appellant herein migrated to India from Pakistan in the year

    1948. He was registered under Section 5 of Bombay Refugees Act, 1948. A

    certificate to that effect was issued in his favour. By an order dated 11.10.1994

    passed by the Settlement Commissioner, he was allotted House No. 4003 in the

    District of Jalna, in lieu of his claim over the land that he owned and possessed

    in Pakistan.


                   Respondent No.4 indisputably was in possession of the said

    premises. A notice dated 2.4.2005 was issued asking it to vacate the said

    premises in terms of Section 19 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and

    Rehabilitation) Act, 1954. The respondent filed a writ petition before the
                                         2

Bombay High Court. The said writ petition was allowed directing:



           "In view of this position, the writ petition is disposed of. Rule
           is discharged. However, the Managing Officer is directed to
           take into consideration the observations made above and give
           reasonable opportunity to the petitioners before passing
           further necessary orders. Considering the time taken in this
           matter, we expect that the Managing Officer will pass
           necessary orders within a period of two months form the date
           of receipt of this order. The petitioners to appear before the
           Managing Officer and it will not be necessary for the
           Managing Officer to issue further notices to the petitioners to
           appear before him. The petitioners should, suo motu, appear
           before the Managing Officer on 3rd April, 2000."
           Pursuant thereto or in furtherance thereof the Managing Officer

heard the parties. However, despite the fact that limited notice was issued to

respondent No.4, their other contentions were also entertained and it was

ordered:

           "The representation made by the petitioner is allowed. It is
           declared that the petitioner is entitled to get the property on
           Government approved rates as are prevalent today as per B
           &amp; C Department. In case the respondent obtains an order
           from the competent authorities holding him entitled to
           receive amount of compensation within a period of six month
           then he can withdraw the said amount deposited by the
           petitioner after assessment at the Government approved
           rates. The request of the respondent for allotment of house
           No. 4003 is rejected.
           The petitioners are directed to execute a bond on a stamp
           paper of Rs. 20/- giving an undertaking that they are ready to
           purchase the house in question at price as may be determined
           by B &amp; C Department on approved Government rates. If the
           petitioners are not ready to purchase the said property than
           they may be evicted and the property be sold by auction as
           per rules laid in Govt. letter dated 1.1.88 &amp; 3.3.95.
                                         3
           The notice issued to the petitioners in the year 1995 for their
           eviction is withdrawn."
            The appeal as well as a revision application preferred by the

appellant thereagainst have been dismissed. He questioned the validity of the

said orders by filing a writ petition before the High Court of Judicature at

Bombay. It was marked as Writ Petition No. 6762/2002. By reason of the

impugned judgment dated 11.10.2005, the said writ petition has been dismissed

by the High Court directing:


            "By this petition the petitioner seeks a direction to hand over
            peaceful, vacant possession of the house property bearing
            No. 4003-Jaina. Such prayer can better be decided in a civil
            suit. Similar is the prayer regarding cancellation of
            conveyance in favour of the petitioner. That also is a prayer
            which can be agitated before the appropriate civil court.
            Reserving those rights the petition is dismissed. Civil
            Application No. 1654 of 2004 stands disposed of
            accordingly."
            Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant would submit

that keeping in view the provisions of Section 36 of the Displaced Persons

(Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 as also Section 46 of the

Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950, the Civil Court has no

jurisdiction to entertain the suit. The learned counsel appears to be correct.



 Section   36   of   the   Displaced   Persons   (Compensation        and

Rehabilitation) Act, 1954, reads as under:
                                           4
            "Bar of jurisdiction.- Save as otherwise expressly
            provided in this Act, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to
            entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter
            which the Central Government or any officer or authority
            appointed under this Act is empowered by or under this Act
            to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any
            Court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to
            be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under
            this Act."
 Section 46 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950,

reads as under:


            "Jurisdiction of Civil Courts barred in certain
            matters.- Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,
            no Court or Revenue Court shall have jurisdiction-

            (a) to entertain or adjudicate upon question whether any
            property or any right to or interest in any property is or is
            not evacuee property; or

            xxx         xxx          xxx          xxx         xxx

            (c) to question the legality of any action taken by the
            Custodian-General or the Custodian under this Act; or


            (d) in respect of any matter which the Custodian-General or
            the Custodian is empowered by or under this Act to
            determine."
            The provisions of the 1954 Act as also 1950 Act are absolutely clear

and explicit, in terms whereof the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is barred. This

aspect of the matter is covered by a decision of this Court in Custodian of

Evacuee Property, Punjab &amp; Ors. vs. Jafran Begum, (AIR 1968 SC 169).
                                         5
            We, therefore, are of the opinion that the High Court could not

have directed the appellant to file a civil suit. The impugned order, therefore,

cannot be sustained and it is set aside accordingly. The matter is remitted to the

High Court for consideration thereof afresh on merit. The appeal is disposed of.

            The respondent No.4 shall not create any third party interest in the

meantime.


            We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion on the

merit of the matter.


            We would however request the High Court to consider the

desirability of disposing of the matter as expeditiously as possible, preferably

within a period of six months from the date of communication of this order.




                                                 ......................J
                                                 (S.B. SINHA)



                                                  .......................J
                                                 (CYRIAC JOSEPH)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 29, 2008.

