
Supreme Court of India
State Of Haryana &amp; Ors vs Kewal Krishan Nagpal &amp; Ors on 26 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2624 of 2002

PETITIONER:
STATE OF HARYANA &amp; ORS

RESPONDENT:
KEWAL KRISHAN NAGPAL &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CIVIL APPEAL NO.2624 OF 2002



	The short question involved in this appeal is as to whether a Typewriter 
Instructor is a Teacher or not.  
	We have heard the parties at length.
	According to the University Calender the Teacher shall include Principal, 
Lecturer, Lecturer in Physical Education, Tutor, Demonstrator, Instructor and 
Librarian in the service of a Non-Govt. College.
	It appears that by a letter dated 12.2.1999 an instruction has been issued to 
clarify the confusion created with regard to the entitlement of vacations by the 
category of staff such as SLA/JLA/Typewriter Instructor/Tabla Player and 
Laboratory Attendant as to whether they are entitled to full vacations like Teaching 
staff or they are non-teaching staff and like any other Government staff they are 
entitled only to casual leave or other vacations during the year.

	Clause (1) of the said instructions clearly states that if any University Rules are 
contrary to the aforesaid instructions they must be amended accordingly. It is stated 
that the aforesaid Government Circular has been challenged by the respondent 
before the High Court by filing a writ petition. The High Court has held that the 
typewriters are entitled to the benefits available to the teaching staff and, therefore, 
no amendment has been carried out in consonance with the direction contained in the 
Government order dated 12.2.1999. 
	Having regard to the peculiar facts that some of the respondents have been 
enjoying the facilities since more than 13 years in accordance with the University 
Calender we do not want to interfere with the impugned order. We, however, leave 
the question of law open. We also allow the appellant State to amend the University 
Calender in terms of the Government order dated 12.2.1999.  Such amendment if 
any carried out pursuant to the Government order shall be prospective.  If any such 
amendment is made it shall cover  all cases of the Typewriter Instructors including 
the case of the respondents herein.
	This appeal is disposed with the direction indicated above. We make it clear 
that  the University and other authorities are, however, allowed to amend the Rules 
in consonance with the Government Order dated 12.2.1999.

