
Supreme Court of India
Ajay Kumar Shah Jagati vs Commnr. Of Income Tax on 24 January, 2008Bench: S.H. Kapadia, B. Sudershan Reddy
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  665-666 of 2008

PETITIONER:
AJAY KUMAR SHAH JAGATI

RESPONDENT:
COMMNR. OF INCOME TAX

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/01/2008

BENCH:
S.H. KAPADIA &amp; B. SUDERSHAN REDDY

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R	

	
	Leave granted.	

	In these civil appeals we are concerned with the scope of Sec.2(47)(v) 
read with Sec.53A of the T.P.Act.
	Assessee entered into an agreement to sell 7000 sq.ms. vacant land to 
M/s. Kumaon Constructions Ltd., Nainital, for Rs.25.00 lacs.  The 
agreement was registered with Sub-Registrar, Nainital, and Rs. 2.00 lacs 
were received as advance.

	In the period relevant to Assessment Year 1989-90 assessee claims to 
have transferred 24 plots to the nominees of M/s. Kumaon Construction 
Ltd. for total consideration of Rs. 15,20,900/- inclusive of Rs. 2.00 lacs as 
advance.

-2-
	The Assessing Officer called upon the assessee to show cause why 
capital gains should not be assessed with reference to total consideration 
of Rs. 25.00 lacs fixed in the agreement for sale.  In his reply assessee 
submitted that he has not given possession of the entire area of 7000 
sq.ms. of vacant land; that he continues to be in possession of the land 
not transferred and therefore Sec. 2(47)(v) was not applicable. The AO did 
not agree with the contention of the assessee and accordingly worked out 
capital gains liability on the entire consideration of Rs. 25.00 lacs  
principally on the ground that major portion of total land has already been 
sold and thus a part of contract was performed and accordingly the case 
stood covered by Sec. 53A of the T.P. Act.  This view was confirmed by the 
CIT (A).

	The assessee then preferred second appeal before the Tribunal which 
was allowed by the Tribunal observing that the approach of Revenue was 
erroneous.  According to the Tribunal the order of AO was based upon 
mis-conception of legal principles.  According to the Tribunal in the period 
relevant to the Assessment Year under consideration, assessee had 
transferred 24 plots to different persons 




-3-
(nominees of M/s. Kumaon Construction Ltd.) for total consideration of 
Rs.15,20,900/- and therefore the assessee was not liable to return capital 
gains on the sum of Rs.25.00 lacs.  This appears to be the reason given by 
the Tribunal for upholding the  contention advanced on behalf of the 
assessee.

	Aggrieved by the said decision, the Department carried the matter in 
appeal under Sec. 260A to the Uttaranchal High Court which has upheld 
the judgment of the Tribunal.  Hence these civil appeals.

	Unfortunately, in the present civil appeals the basic facts are not on the 
record. It appears from the agreement dated 25.4.1988 that the assessee 
had agreed to sell to M/s. Kumaon Construction Ltd., Nainital, land 
admeasuring 7000 sq.ms.. That agreement is subsequently rescinded.  
However, between 25.4.1988 and the date of rescisson (22.10.1990) the 
plot admeasuring 7000 sq.ms. stood sub-divided.  The sub-divided 24 
plots were conveyed by the assessee to the nominees of M/s. Kumaon 
Construction Ltd.. None of the saledeeds have been produced by the 
assessee before the Department.  In such cases it is very essential to look 
into the recitals mentioned in the sale deeds. 

-4-
	 Briefly, it may be stated that in order that the case would fall under the 
extended meaning of the word `transfer', possession is essential element 
to be considered.  That is the crux of the matter.

	In the present case no finding qua possession has been recorded by the 
Tribunal.  It may also be noted that there is nothing on record to indicate 
the name of the applicant who had applied for sub-division. No revenue or 
municipal  records have been produced which could have indicated as to 
whether the area admeasuring 7000 sq.ms. or a part thereof stood 
conveyed and delivered to M/s. Kumaon Construction Ltd. at the relevant 
time. It is not clear as to how many plots stood conveyed and how many 
plots remained. In the absence of these basic facts which are primary 
facts, we are of the view that the Tribunal could not have allowed the 
appeal in favour of the assessee.  What is the indexed cost of each plot is 
not mentioned.  Unfortunately, none of the above aspects have been  been 
considered even by the High Court in its impugned judgment.

	For the aforesaid reasons, we remit the matters to the Tribunal for fresh 
consideration in accordance with law.  We make it clear that the assessee 
shall file all 




-5-
relevant documents including conveyance(s) in favour of the nominees of 
M/s. Kumaon Construction Ltd., the relevant plan indicating sub-division 
of plots, copy of the application made to the competent authority for sub-
division of the plots and lastly the Municipal and Revenue records in 
which the relevant entries made regarding possession. Basically, the 
question would be how many plots have been conveyed, how many are 
retained, whether possession of the entire land was ever handed over to 
Kumaon Construction and how was cost calculated by the assessee.

	For the aforestated reasons, the appeals stand allowed and the impugned 
judgments of the High Court and the Tribunal are set aside. The matters 
are remitted to the Tribunal for fresh consideration in accordance with 
law.

