
Supreme Court of India
Sohan Raj Sharma vs State Of Haryana on 7 April, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  1464 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Sohan Raj Sharma

RESPONDENT:
State of Haryana

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 07/04/2008

BENCH:
DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
REPORTABLE

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1464 OF 2007

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a 
learned Single Judge of the Punjab and Haryana High Court 
upholding appellant's conviction for offence punishable under 
Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short 'IPC') and 
sentence of 7 years RI.

2.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:
	First Information Report lodged by Shri Rajiv Lochan 
Jain (PW4) was to the effect that Jyoti (hereinafter referred to 
as the 'deceased') had written in her letter that her husband 
Sohan Raj Sharma the accused-appellant was torturing him 
for sex in many different ways, mostly pervert and tired of the 
same, she had poisoned her children, and had consumed 
poison herself. The FIR is further to the effect that appellant-
Sohan Raj Sharma, because of the circumstances, had 
compelled Jyoti to consume poison.  The first endorsement of 
the Investigating Officer ASI Rohtash Singh (PW10) on the 
statement Ex.PL of Shri Rajiv Lochan Jain (PW4) is Ex.PL/1 
and it is to the effect that on his reaching B.K. Hospital 
Faridabad alongwith other police officials, Shri Rajiv Lochan 
Jain had handed him over one letter (Ex.PX ) of eight pages 
which was taken into possession of the police vide memo 
Ex.PM and from the statement of Shri Rajiv Lochan Jain and 
the letter produced by him, the allegations of commission of 
offences punishable under Section 306 IPC on the part of the 
Sohan Raj Sharma were made out.  Statement Ex. PL/1, the 
statement Ex. PL alongwith endorsement Ex.PL/1 was sent to 
the police station for registration of the case on which formal 
FIR was recorded.  During investigation, the incriminating 
evidence in the form of medical evidence regarding death of 
Jyoti, Pinki and Gudiya having been caused due to 
consumption of poison surfaced.  Further the report regarding 
letter (Ex.PX) and other oral evidence of the witnesses 
regarding circumstances connected with the occurrence were 
collected. Accused Sohan Raj Sharma was put on trial for 
offence punishable u/s 306 IPC, he was challaned by the 
police and was committed to the court of Sessions for trial by 
the Illaqa Magistrate.

3.	Prosecution examined 11 witnesses and exhibited several 
documents.  Most vital one is purported suicide note Ex.PX.  
Appellant took the stand during examination under Section 
313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in for 'Code') 
that she was never married to the deceased officially.  It also 
alleged that she was a lesbian and in proof of this stand,  one 
Anita Parmar was examined as DW1. The Trial Court found 
the contents of Ex.PX satisfied ingredients of Section 306 IPC.  
Accordingly, the appellant was found guilty and convicted and 
sentenced as aforesaid.  

4.	In appeal before the High Court, the stand taken before 
the Trial Court that ingredients of Section 306 IPC have not 
been fulfilled was reiterated. Stand of the prosecution was that 
the ingredients have been established.              

5.	The High Court found that Ex.PX was sufficient to show 
as to what was the reason for deceased committing suicide.

6.	Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that letter 
Ex.PX in no way establishes that the appellant had abeted the 
suicide. As a matter of fact, the fact that the deceased took the 
lives of two innocent children and then committed suicide 
without any doubt establishes that she was mentally 
unsound.  The letter at the most describes the accused as a 
sexual pervert, but his behaviour, if any, cannot be taken to 
be an act of abeting the suicide.  It is pointed out that in Ex Px 
she has clearly stated that she wanted to take appellants' life.       

7.	Learned counsel for the respondents-State on the other 
hand supported the judgment of the courts below. 

Section 306 IPC deals with abetment of suicide.  The said 
provision reads as follows:

"306 ABETMENT OF SUICIDE. 
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets 
the commission of such suicide, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either 
description for a term which may extend to ten 
years, and shall also be liable to fine." 

8.	Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a 
person or intentionally aiding that person in doing of a thing. 
In cases of conspiracy also it would involve that mental 
process of entering into conspiracy for the doing of that thing. 
More active role which can be described as instigating or 
aiding the doing of a thing it required before a person can be 
said to be abetting the commission of offence under Section 
306 of IPC.

9.	In State of West Bengal v. Orilal Jaiswal (AIR 1994 SC 
1418) this Court has observed that the courts should be 
extremely careful in assessing the facts and circumstances of 
each case and the evidence adduced in the trial for the 
purpose of finding whether the cruelty meted out to the victim 
had in fact induced her to end her life by committing suicide.  
If it transpires to the Court that a victim committing suicide 
was hypersensitive to ordinary petulance, discord and 
differences in domestic life quite common to the society to 
which the victim belonged and such petulance discord and 
differences were not expected to induce a similarly 
circumstanced individual in a given society to commit suicide, 
the conscience of the Court should not be satisfied for basing 
a finding that the accused charged of abetting the offence of 
suicide should be found guilty.  

10.	Section 107 IPC defines abetment of a thing. The offence 
of abetment is a separate and distinct offence provided in the 
Act as an offence. A person, abets the doing of a thing when (1) 
he instigates any person to do that thing; or (2) engages with 
one or more other persons in any conspiracy for the doing of 
that thing; or (3) intentionally aids, by act or illegal omission, 
the doing of that thing. These things are essential to complete 
abetment as a crime. The word "instigate" literally means to 
provoke, incite, urge on or bring about by persuasion to do 
any thing. The abetment may be by instigation, conspiracy or 
intentional aid, as provided in the three clauses of Section 
107. Section 109 provides that if the act abetted is committed 
in consequence of abetment and there is no provision for the 
punishment of such abetment, then the offender is to be 
punished with the punishment provided for the original 
offence. 'Abetted' in Section 109 means the specific offence 
abetted. Therefore, the offence for the abetment of which a 
person is charged with the abetment is normally linked with 
the proved offence

11.	In cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be 
proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission 
of suicide.  The mere fact that the husband treated the 
deceased-wife with cruelty is not enough. [See Mahinder Singh 
v. State of M.P. (1995 AIR SCW 4570)].

12.	When the factual scenario is examined, it is clear that the 
accused has been described as a sexual pervert and that he 
had behaved like an animal and the deceased had tolerated 
the insulting manner in which he behaved. They were married 
in court.  It was stated that the accused was impotent and he 
was trying to defame the deceased for having relationship with 
ladies. 

13.	The most significant part of the letter the deceased had 
written is as follows:              

"I desired to kill you alongwith us but no, if 
you have any sense of shame you will die as a 
result of the sequence of events. But it do not 
make any difference for shameless person 
because these abuses will sound as correct if 
you realize your capacity.  You have not spent 
even eight days in a period of eight years in 
peace with me. You yourself are responsible for 
death of these children.  Flowers had been 
prayed for from the deities of your family 
regarding whom you disclosed "they are not 
mine they are with me from my friend.  (girl 
friend) on, you, the condemned the day 
children will be born as a result of co-
habitation of a woman with woman, a woman  
will stop giving birth to man like you."   
				(Underlined for emphasis)
 
14.	Above being the factual scenario, it cannot be said that 
the ingredients of Section 306 IPC have been established. 
Therefore, the conviction as recorded cannot be maintained.  
The order of the High Court is set aside.  The appellant be 
released forthwith unless required in connection with other 
case.    

