
Supreme Court of India
J.E. Dawson vs National Museum &amp; Ors on 21 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2514 of 2002

PETITIONER:
J.E. DAWSON

RESPONDENT:
NATIONAL MUSEUM &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NO.2514  OF 2002

	Heard the parties.
	The controversy involved in this appeal is with regard to the promotion from 
the post of Deputy Keeper(Archaeology) to the post of Curator/Keeper 
(Archaeology). Under the Rules the post of Deputy Keeper (Archaeology) is a feeder 
post for promotion to the post of Curator/Keeper(Archaeology). Under the relevant 
recruitment rules the requisite qualification is five years serving as Deputy 
Keeper(Archaeology). 
	The question raised in this appeal is, as to whether the appellant possessed 
requisite qualification for the promotion to the post of 
Curator/Keeper(Archaeology). Undisputed facts are that the appellant was 
appointed as Deputy Keeper(Archaeology) on 01.04.1992. He was promoted to the 
post of Curator/Keeper (Archaeology) on 22.06.1999.
	The Rules clearly provides that  for the post of Keeper(Archaeology) the 
appointment is made by way of promotion, failing which by direct recruits. The 
Tribunal also found that the requisite qualification is five years in the grade.  The 
Tribunal has also recorded a finding that the respondent was not Deputy 
Keeper(Archaeology) and, therefore, he is not entitled to be promoted to the post of 
Curator/Keeper(Archaeology).
	The appellant was appointed as Deputy Keeper(Archaeology) with effect from 
01.04.1992 and he was promoted to the post of Curator/Keeper(Archaeology) on 
22.06.1999. We are of the view that the appellant has possessed requisite 
qualification of five years in the grade.  
	In that view of the matter, the conclusion recorded by the High Court and the 
Tribunal that the appellant did not possess requisite qualification is clearly 
erroneous and is accordingly set aside.  The appeal is allowed. No costs.

