
Supreme Court of India
M/S Amrut Distillerites Ltd vs Swami Nandagopalan &amp; Ors on 13 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Makandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  8105-8107 of 2001

PETITIONER:
M/S AMRUT DISTILLERITES LTD

RESPONDENT:
SWAMI NANDAGOPALAN &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 13/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MAKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8105-8107 OF 2001
WITH
CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 8110-8111 OF 2001 &amp; 2185 OF 2002

	We have heard the parties at length.
	The questions involved for determination in this batch of appeals are (1) as to 
whether the manufacture of potable  alcohol is vested in the State Government or the 
Union Government;  and if so, (2) whether a license is required under Section 11 of the 
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, for manufacture of potable alcohol.
	The Division Bench of the High Court followed the judgment rendered by a 
Constitution Bench of this Court in Synthetic &amp; Chemicals Ltd. &amp; Others Vs. State of 
U.P. &amp; Others (1990 1 SCC 109) and held that for the manufacture of potable alcohol an 
additional license under Section 11 of the Act would also be required.  While saying so, 
the Division Bench of the High Court relied on a sentence  that has crept in to paragraph 
85  of  the   aforesaid   decision   of  this   Court   through 


inadvertence or clerical error in the judgment. The sentence read as "Thereafter, licences 
to manufacture both potable and non-potable alcohol is vested in the Central 
Government".  Obviously the aforesaid sentence crept in paragraph 85 of the judgment 
through inadvertence or clerical error.  We say so because under the Constitutional 
scheme regulation of manufacture and sale etc. of potable alcohol is vested with the State 
Government, whereas the regulation of manufacture and sale etc. of Industrial alcohol is 
vested with the Union of India.
	The aforesaid sentence in paragraph 85 of the Constitution Bench in Synthetic's 
case (supra) has been noticed by the Division Bench of this Court in para 11 of Bihar 
Distillery and Another Vs. Union of India &amp; Others [1997 (2) SCC 727].  After noticing 
the sentence appearing in paragraph 85 of the Constitution Bench judgment, this Court 
clarified in paragraph 12 of the Bihar Distillery's judgment (supra) as under:
	"It is obvious that the words "both potable and" occur here as a result of some 
accidental or typographical error.  The entire preceding discussion in the judgment 
repeatedly affirms that so far as potable alcohols are concerned, they are governed 
by Entry 8 and are within the exclusive domain of the States.  The aforesaid words 
cannot fit in with the said repeatedly affirmed reasoning.  We are, therefore, of the 
opinion that the said passage cannot be understood as holding that even in respect 
of the industries engaged in the manufacture or production of potable liquors, the 
control is vested in the union by virtue of Item 26 of the First Schedule to the IDR 
Act.  In view of the express language of Entry 8  as has been clearly explained in 
McDowell  so far as potable liquors are concerned, their manufacture, production, 
possession, transport, purchase and sale is within the exclusive domain of the States 
and the Union of India has no say in the matter.  For a similar clarification with 
respect to the power of the State to levy sales tax on industrial alcohol, reference 
may be had to State of U.P. Vs. Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd.'
	In  our  view,  the  aforesaid   sentence  crept  in in
paragraph 85 of the Constitution Bench judgment in Syntehetic's case (supra) was clearly 
due to a clerical error which has been rightly clarified by the subsequent judgment in 
Bihar Distillery's case (supra).
	We also noticed the High Court's reference to Article 47 of the Constitution which 
is a Directive Principle of State Policy and hence not enforceable.
	In that view of the matter, the Division Bench of the High Court fell in error in 
following the sentence which crept in inadvertently in paragraph 85 of the Synthetic's case 
(supra) judgment.
	In the result, the appeals are allowed.  The judgment of the Division Bench of the 
High Court is set aside.  The matter is remitted to the High Court to consider the matter 
afresh in terms of the judgment rendered by this Court in Bihar Distillery's case.
	The High Court may consider making Union of India as party respondent.

