
Supreme Court of India
M/S United India Insurance Co.Ltd vs M/S Wani Carpets &amp; Anr on 1 August, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                                                          1


                           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4772 OF 2008
                             [Arising out of SLP(C) No.8151/2007]


M/S. UNITED INDIA INSURANCE CO. LTD.                               ...    APPELLANT(S)

                                          :VERSUS:

M/S. WANI CARPETS AND ANR.                                          ...   RESPONDENT(S)


                                          ORDER

              Leave granted.

              Nobody appears on behalf of the respondents despite service of notice. Heard

     the learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant.

              The parties hereto have entered into a contract of insurance in terms

     whereof, inter alia, in the event of loss of goods caused by fire and/or riots, the

     appellant was to reimburse the claim of the respondents.



              The respondents filed a claim petition claiming a sum of Rs.34,90,000/-

     before the State Consumer Protection Commission. The J &amp; K State Consumers

     Protection Commission by its judgment and order dated 8.10.2004 directed the

     appellant to pay to the respondent a sum of Rs.34,90,000/- with interest at the rate of

     9% per annum.
                                             2
            An appeal was preferred thereagainst by the appellant before the High

Court. The said appeal was dismissed for non-prosecution on 7.9.2006. The appellant

filed an application for restoration of the said appeal. The High Court by reason of

the impugned order, without passing any order on the said restoration application,

directed:


            "Our attention is invited to the award amount not being deposited
            by the appellant-Company. Four weeks' time is granted for
            depositing this amount.
            List after four weeks, as and when the Bench becomes available."
            Mr. K.B. Sinha, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant

would submit that keeping in view the fact that the appeal was dismissed for default,

in absence of any order restoring the same to its original file, the impugned judgment

directing the appellant to deposit the entire amount awarded should not have been

passed.


            It is not in dispute that the impugned order dated 13.02.2007 has been passed

in Restoration Application No.8/2006.


            It is one thing to say that the Court imposes conditions for restoring the

appeal but it is another thing to say that before exercising its discretionary

jurisdiction, some conditions could be imposed. The stage of exercising discretionary

jurisdiction of the High Court in restoring the said appeal preferred by the appellant
                                            3

had not yet reached. It was for the High Court to pass appropriate orders on the said

application for restoration of appeal, at the first instance. Only in the event the High

Court thought it fit to allow the said application, it could have put the appellant to

reasonable terms.


         For the reasons aforementioned, the impugned judgment cannot be sustained

and it is set aside accordingly. The High Court is requested to pass appropriate orders

on the merit of the restoration application at the first instance.

         The appeal is disposed of accordingly.


                                                ..........................J
                                                (S.B. SINHA)



                                                 ..........................J
                                                (CYRIAC JOSEPH)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 1, 2008.

