
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India vs R. Meenatchi And Anr on 20 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  2265 of 2002

PETITIONER:
UNION OF INDIA

RESPONDENT:
R. MEENATCHI AND ANR

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 20/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CIVIL APPEAL NO.2265  OF 2002


	In this appeal the question of interpretation of proviso to Schedule appended 
to the Rules called Government of Pondicherry, (Superintendent Grade-II) 
Recruitment Rules, 1991 has been raised. The controversy  is confined to proviso to 
the Schedule appended to the Rules. It reads :
"  Provided that the Assistants or, as the case may be, Senior Grade 
Stenographers, who have completed 15 years of continuous service as on   
1-8-1981 are exempted from passing the Higher Accounts Test:"
	The question is while reckoning the period of 15 years of continuous service as 
on 1-8-1981 whether the entire period of service rendered by Assistants or Senior 
Grade Stenographers is to be counted or only the period as Assistants or 
Stenographers as the case may be.
	The Tribunal has interpreted the proviso to mean that the period of 15 years is 
to be counted on continued service as on 1-8-1981 and not as Assistant  or Senior 
Grade Stenographers as the case may be. Aggrieved thereby, the State  preferred  
writ petition  before  the  High  Court. 			: 2 :
The Division Bench of the High Court disposed of the appeal by a cryptic order in  
terms of the following :
"   Counsel says that the interpretation placed by the Tribunal on the 
relevant Rules is incorrect.  Having seen the Rule and the reasoning of 
the Tribunal, we cannot accept that submission. The writ petition is 
dismissed.  Consequently, W.M.P. No.8968 of 2001 is dismissed."
	We do not appreciate the way the Division Bench of the High Court disposed  
of the appeal as  contentious points have been raised before the High Court with 
regard to the interpretation of the Rules. It was incumbent upon the Division Bench 
of the High Court to interpret the law supported by reasons.  In this view of the 
matter the order of the Division Bench of the High Court being not supported by  
reasons is not tenable in law. The same is set aside and the matter is remitted to the 
High Court for a fresh decision in accordance with law. 
	The appeal is disposed of accordingly.

