
Supreme Court of India
K. Chithhayan vs State Of Tamil Nadu on 15 May, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
                                                    REPORTABLE
                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 827 OF 2005


K. Chithhayan                                ...Appellant


                           Versus


State of Tamil Nadu                          ...Respondent


                         JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.   Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of a learned

Single Judge of the Madras High Court upholding the

conviction of the appellant for offence punishable under

Section 8 (c) read with Section 22 of the Narcotic Drugs and

Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (in short the `Act') and

sentence of 10 years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of
Rs.1,00,000/- as was imposed by learned Special Judge,

Salem.

2.      Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:



        Veerannan (PW-1), Sub Inspector of Police, attached to

N.I.B. C.I.D., Salem on 16.12.1999 at about 9.00 A.M. along

with Vellingiri (PW-4), Head Constable No.910 and other Police

party      on    secret    information      were   patrolling      at

Pethanayakkampalaym Bus Stop. They found activities of the

appellant/accused, who stood near the bus stop with a yellow

colour bag on his right hand, at about 12.00 noon, to be

suspicious. P.W.1 after introducing himself, conveyed to him

that he is entitled for the conduct of the search before a

Gazetted Officer or a Judicial Magistrate. The accused gave

consent to be searched by the official himself. Accordingly,

P.W.1     searched   his   bag   in   the   presence   of   the   two

independent witnesses namely Duraisamy (PW-2), Village

Administrative Assistant and Duraisamy Assistant (PW-3) and

P.W.4 Head Constable and found 2 Kilograms of Diazepam.

P.W.1 seized the same under Ex.P2 mahazar in the presence

                                 2
of the said witnesses. He took two samples of 25 grams each

marked as M.0.2 and affixed the seal and the rest of the

contraband was sealed, which is marked as M.0.1.The

appellant/accused was arrested under Ex.P3 arrest memo, a

copy of which was served on him. The accused was brought to

the Office, and a case was registered in Crime No. 91/99

under Sec. 20(b) (1) of the Act. Ex.P4 printed F.I.R. was

prepared. The accused was taken to the concerned Court

along with the F.I.R and the material objects. A detailed report

under Ex.P5 under Sec.57 of'-the Act was prepared and sent

to the higher officials. Sankarapandian (PW-6), Inspector of

police, NIB CID, Salem took up further investigation after

obtaining Ex.P5 and other relevant records from PW-1. He

proceeded to the site of occurrence and also to the house of

the accused, made a search in front of the witnesses, prepared

Ex.P7 search memo, examined PWs 1 to 4 and recorded their

statements. The investigating officer (PW-6) made a request

under Ex.P8 to the Court for sending M.O.2 for chemical

analysis.   Accordingly,   the       sample   was   analysed   by

Arulanandam (PW-5) Scientific Assistant attached to the

                                 3
Forensic Laboratory, who found that the sample under M.O.2

is diazepam. PW-5 sent Ex.P6 report to the Court. On

19.1.2002 PW-6 examined PW-5 and recorded his statement.

On completion of the investigation, PW-6 filed a charge sheet

against the accused under Section 22 of the Act.



     Since the accused pleaded innocence the trial was held.

Six witnesses were examined and several exhibits and

material objects were brought on record. In his examination

under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in

short the `Code') the accused-appellant flatly denied the

accusations. He examined his wife as PW-1. The trial Court

found that the prosecution has been able to establish its

accusations. Two grounds were taken before the High Court

relating to the alleged non compliance of the mandatory

provisions of Sections 42(2) and the other 50 of the Act. The

High Court did not find any substance. Accordingly, the

appeal was dismissed.


                             4
3.   In support of the appeal, learned counsel for the

appellant submitted that even if the prosecution case is

accepted   in toto there    is clear material to show the

contravention of the requirements of Sections 42(2) and 50 of

the Act.


4.   Learned counsel for the respondent-State supported the

judgments of the trial Court and the High Court.



5.   Sections 42(2) and 43 of the Act are as under:


           "42(2)-Where an officer takes down any
           information in writing under sub-section (1) or
           records grounds for his belief under the
           proviso thereto, he shall within seventy-two
           hours send a copy thereof to his immediate
           official superior.

           43. Power of seizure and arrest in public
           place.-Any officer of any of the departments
           mentioned in section 42 may-
           (a) seize in any public place or in transit, any
           narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or
           controlled substance in respect of which he
           has reason to believe an offence punishable
           under this Act has been committed, and, along
           with such drug or substance, any animal or
           conveyance or article liable to confiscation

                              5
          under this Act, any document or other article
          which he has reason to believe may furnish
          evidence of the commission of an offence
          punishable under this Act or any document or
          other article which may furnish evidence of
          holding any illegally acquired property which
          is liable for seizure or freezing or forfeiture
          under Chapter VA of this Act;

          (b) detain and search any person whom he has
          reason to believe to have committed an offence
          punishable under this Act, and if such person
          has any narcotic drug or psychotropic
          substance or controlled substance in his
          possession and such possession appears to
          him to be unlawful, arrest him and any other
          person in his company.

          Explanation.-For the purposes of this section,
          the expression "public place" includes any
          public conveyance, hotel, shop, or other place
          intended for use by, or accessible to, the
          public."


6.   So far as Section 42(2) is concerned it is to be noted that

search was made in public place and not in a building and as

such what was applicable was Section 43 and not Section 42

(2) of the Act. The decision of this Court in State of Punjab vs.

Baldev Singh (1999 (6) SCC 172) is clearly applicable to the

facts of the present case. The view in Baldev Singh's case


                              6
(supra) was re-iterated in State of Haryana v. Jarnail Singh

and Ors. (2004 (5) SCC 188).


7.   So far as the applicability of Section 50 of the Act is

concerned, it is to be noted that there was search of the bag

carried by the appellant and there was no personal search. It

has been held in State of H.P. v. Pawan Kumar (2005 (4) SCC

350) that when there is no personal search and the search is

effected in relation to a bag, Section 50 of the Act has no

application.


8.   Above being the position, we find no infirmity in the

judgment of the High Court to warrant interference.                 The

appeal is without merit and is dismissed accordingly.




                                    ..................................J.
                                    (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)



                                    ..................................J.
                                    (P. SATHASIVAM)

                               7
New Delhi,
May 15, 2008




               8
9

