
Supreme Court of India
Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika &amp; ... vs Akruti Nirman Pvt. Ltd. &amp; Anr on 23 January, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  620 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Brihanmumbai Mahanagar Palika &amp; Anr

RESPONDENT:
Akruti Nirman Pvt. Ltd. &amp; Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 23/01/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a 
learned Single Judge of the Bombay High Court allowing the 
appeal filed by the respondents. The appeal was filed by the 
respondents challenging the order passed by learned 
Additional Chief Judge of Small Causes Court dated 31.3.2000 
in Municipal Appeal No. 19 of 2000 under Section 217 of the 
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 (in short the Act).  
In the appeal, the order of assessment passed by the present 
appellants was under challenge.  The order of the respondents 
related to refusal to entertain the complaint of the respondents 
and confirmation of rateable value.

3.	Though many points were urged in support of the appeal, 
the main plank of the argument of learned counsel for the 
appellants was that the High Court has not applied its mind to 
various points urged and after noting the submissions came to 
abrupt conclusions.  In other words it is submitted the 
judgment is practically non-reasoned.

4.	Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand 
said that though elaborate analysis have not been made, yet 
the conclusions have been arrived at after noting the 
submissions. 

5.	It is to be noted that various contentious pleas were 
raised in the appeal.   The High Court ought to have analysed 
the factual position in the background of principles of law 
involved and then to decide the appeal. That has not been 
done.

6.	It is to be noted that after making detailed reference to 
the arguments and contentions raised, abrupt conclusions 
were arrived at by the High Court.  That is not a proper way to 
dispose of the first appeal.

7.	In the circumstances without expressing any opinion on 
the merits of the case, we set aside the impugned judgment of 
the High Court and remit the matter to it for fresh 
consideration on merit in accordance with law. 

8.	The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent without any 
order as to costs.

