
Supreme Court of India
Shahu Shikshan Prasarak Mandal &amp; ... vs Lata P. Kore &amp; Ors on 23 September, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, Mukundakam Sharma
                                                          REPORTABLE


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICITON

              CIVIL APPEAL NO.5801 OF 2008
          (Arising out of SLP (C) No.16811 of 2006)



Shahu Shikshan Prasarak Mandal
and Anr.                                      ...Appellants


          Versus


Lata P. Kore &amp; Ors.                           ...Respondents



                         JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.


1.   Leave granted.


2.   Challenge in this appeal is to the order of a Division

Bench of the Bombay High Court dismissing the Letters
Patent Appeal filed by the appellant. Writ Petition filed by the

appellant was dismissed on the ground that the same was not

maintainable.


3.   Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the

impugned     order   of   the       Division   Bench   is   clearly

unsustainable.   Reference is made to Rules 3 &amp; 18 of the

Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules, 1960 (in short the

`Rules') with the amended Letters Patent of the High Court of

Bombay, 1865 (in short the `Letters Patent'). It is submitted

that the Division Bench did not take note of what has been

stated by several judgments of this Court.



4.   Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand

supported the impugned judgment of the High Court.



5.   Rules 3, 18(41) and the proviso 18(44) read as follows:



           "3. Appeal to be placed before Division
           Bench for admission - Appeals under Clause



                                2
15 of the Letters Patent shall be placed for
admission before a Division Bench.

18. Single Judge's powers to finally dispose of
applications under Article 226 or 227 -
Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule
1,4 and 17 of this Chapter applications under
Article 226 or under Article 227 of the
Constitution for      applications styled as
applications under Article 227 of the
Constitution read with Article 226 of the
Constitution arising out of :

                     xxx
     (41) The order passed under the
          Maharashtra Employees of Private
          Schools (Conditions of Service)
          Regulation Act, 1977.

     (44)      Orders passed by the different
            Committees constituted by the State
            Government for verification of the
            claims of Scheduled Cast and
            Scheduled Tribe candidates, may be
            heard and finally disposed or by a
            single judge to be appointed in this
            behalf by the Chief Justice.

            Provided when the matter in dispute
            is or relates to the challenge to the
            validity of any statute or any rules
            or regulations made thereunder,
            such applications shall be heard
            and disposed off by a Division
            Bench to be appointed by the Chief
            Justice."

                    3
6.   In Umaji Keshao Meshram v. Radhikabai [1986 Supp.

SCC 401], Sushilabai Laxminarayan Mudliyar &amp; Ors. v.

Nihalchand Waghajibhai Shaha &amp; Ors. [1993 Supp. (1) SCC

11] and Mavji C. Lakum v. Central Bank of India [2008(7)

SCALE 32] similar questions were considered.



7.   In Sushilabai's case (supra) it was noted at paragraph 4

as follows:


                 "The Full Bench of the Bombay High Court
              wrongly understood the above Umaji Kesho
              Meshram case (supra). In Umaji case (supra) it
              was clearly held that where the facts justify a
              party in filing an application either under
              Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution of India
              and the party chooses to file his application
              under both these articles in fairness of justice
              to party and in order not to deprive him of
              valuable right of appeal the Court ought to
              treat the application as being made under
              Article 226, and if in deciding the matter, in
              the final order the Court gives ancillary
              directions which may pertain to Article 227,
              this ought not to be held to deprive a party of
              the right of appeal under clause 15 of the
              Letters Patent where the substantial part of
              the order sought to be appealed against is
              under Article 226. Rule 18 of the Bombay High
              Court Appellate Side Rules read with clause
              15 of the Letters Patent provides for appeal to
              the Division Bench of the High Court from a
              judgment of the learned Single Judge passed
              on a writ petition under Article 226 of the
              Constitution. In the present case the Division


                                 4
           Bench was clearly wrong in holding that the
           appeal was not maintainable against the order
           of the learned Single Judge. In these
           circumstances we set aside the impugned
           order of the Division Bench and direct that the
           Letters Patent Appeal filed against the
           judgment of the learned Single Judge would
           now be heard and decided on merits. In view
           of the fact that it is an old matter we request
           the High Court to decide the Letters Patent
           Appeal within six months. It is further directed
           that till the final disposal of the Letters Patent
           Appeal the operation of the order of the Single
           Judge shall remain stayed. The appeals are
           allowed in part with no order as to costs."

8.   In Umaji's case (supra) at paragraph107 it was noted as

follows:

           "Petitions are at times filed both under Articles
           226 and 227 of the Constitution. The case of
           Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Syed Ahmad Ishaque
           [AIR 1955 SC 233] before this Court was of
           such a type. Rule 18 provides that where such
           petitions are filed against orders of the
           Tribunals or authorities specified in Rule 18 of
           Chapter XVII of the Appellate Side Rules or
           against decrees or orders of courts specified in
           that rule, they shall be heard and finally
           disposed of by a Single Judge. The question is
           whether an appeal would lie from the decision
           of the Single Judge in such a case. In our
           opinion, where the facts justify a party in filing
           an application either under Article 226 or 227
           of the Constitution, and the party chooses to
           file his application under both these articles,
           in fairness and justice to such party and in
           order not to deprive him of the valuable right


                               5
           of appeal the court ought to treat the
           application as being made under Article 226,
           and if in deciding the matter, in the final order
           the court gives ancillary directions which may
           pertain to Article 227, this ought not to be
           held to deprive a party of the right of appeal
           under clause 15 of the Letters Patent where
           the substantial part of the order sought to be
           appealed against is under Article 226. Such
           was the view taken by the Allahabad High
           Court in Aidal Singh v. Karan Singh [AIR 1957
           All 414] and by the Punjab High Court in Raj
           Kishan Jain v. Tulsi Dass [AIR 1959 Punj 291]
           and Barham Dutt v. Peoples' Cooperative
           Transport Society Ltd., New Delhi [AIR 1961
           Punj 24] and we are in agreement with it."

9.   In Mavji's case (supra) this Court inter alia noted as

follows:


           "12. At the outset we shall consider the
           contention as to whether the Letters Patent
           Appeal was maintainable against the order of
           the learned Single Judge. It was contended by
           the counsel for the respondent-bank that the
           appeal was not maintainable since the learned
           Single Judge had exercised his jurisdiction
           under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
           and, therefore, there was no question of
           Letters Patent Appeal being maintainable
           against the same. We, therefore, went through
           the Special Civil Application, a copy of which is
           the part of the paperbook. The said writ
           petition clearly mentions on the very first page
           that the writ petition was being filed under


                               6
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Again
           para 10 of the writ petition mentions as under:

              "Being aggrieved by the order passed by the
              Industrial Tribunal, the petitioner begs to
              approach this Hon'ble court under Article
              226 of the Constitution of India challenging
              the award on the following amongst other
              grounds...."

           Ground (iv) on the same page says:

           "That the order passed by the Tribunal is
           arbitrary, unreasonable, unjust and perverse."

      Even prayer clause in para 15 is as under:

           "That by appropriate writ, direction and order,
           the impugned order of Industrial Tribunal
           (Central) Rajkot at Annexure B be quashed
           and/or set aside."

10.   All this suggests that the writ petition was not only under

Article 227 of the Constitution of India but there is a specific

mention of Article 226. In a reported decision of this Court in

Sushilabai Laxminarayan Mudliyar &amp; Ors. V. Nihalchand



                               7
Waghajibhai Shaha and others [(1993) Supp. 1 SCC 11] a

similar question fell for consideration. In para 4 of the said

judgment this Court observed:

          "The Full Bench of the Bombay High Court
          wrongly understood the above Umaji Kesho
          Meshram case. In Umaji case it was clearly
          held that where the facts justify a party in
          filing an application either under Article 226 or
          227 of the Constitution of India and the party
          chooses to file his application under both
          these articles in fairness of justice to party and
          in order not to deprive him of valuable right of
          appeal the court ought to treat the application
          as being made under Article 226, and if in
          deciding the matter, in the final order the
          court gives ancillary directions which may
          pertain to Article 227, this ought not to be
          held to deprive a party of the right of appeal
          under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent where
          the substantial part of the order sought to be
          appealed against is under Article 226. Rule 18
          of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side
          Rules read with clause 15 of the Letters Patent
          provides for appeal to the Division Bench of
          the High Court from a judgment of the learned
          Single Judge passed on a writ petition under
          Article 226 of the Constitution. In the present
          case the Division Bench was clearly wrong in
          holding that the appeal was not maintainable
          against the order of the learned Single Judge.
          In these circumstances we set aside the
          impugned order of the Division Bench and
          direct that the Letters Patent Appeal filed
          against the judgment of the learned Single



                              8
             Judge would not be heard and decided on
             merits...."

These observations were made by this Court after taking into
consideration      the    observations   made    in   Umaji    Keshao
Meshram       &amp;    Ors.   V.   Radhikabai,   Widow     of    Anandrao
Banapurkar &amp; Anr. [1986 (Supp) SCC 401].



12.    In the present matter apart from the fact that the petition

is labeled under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it is

clear that the grounds raised in the petition suggest that the

petition is not only under Article 227 but also under Article

226 of the Constitution. It is to be seen that in the grounds

raised against the order of the Tribunal, it is specifically

suggested that the order passed by the Tribunal was arbitrary,

unreasonable, unjust and perverse. The further complaint

made against the Tribunal's order pertain to failure on the

part    of   the   Tribunal    to   appreciate   certain    facts   and

eventualities thereby complaining non application of mind on

the part of the Tribunal. Complaint has also been made

against the approach of the Tribunal and it is suggested that

the said approach was perverse. After reading the writ petition

                                    9
we are convinced that the contentions raised and the facts

stated in the petition justify the respondent herein to file an

application   both   under   Articles   226   and   227   of   the

Constitution of India."


13.   The effect of the provisions and the decisions referred to

above does not appear to have been considered by the High

Court while holding that the Letters Patent Appeal was not

maintainable.


14.   We, therefore, remit the matter to the High Court to

consider the issues, the applicable provisions and the

decisions afresh.


15.   We make it clear that we have not expressed any opinion

on merits as regard the maintainability. Since the matter is

pending since long, we request the High Court to dispose of

the matter as early as practicable preferably by the end of

2008.

                              10
16.     Appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.         Costs made

easy.


                                                      ......................
..................J.
                                 (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)


                                 ........................................J.
                                 (Dr. MUKUNDAKAM SHARMA)

New Delhi:
September 23, 2008




                               11

