
Supreme Court of India
Union Of India &amp; Ors vs M/S. Dharamendra Textile ... on 29 September, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam, Aftab Alam
                                                          REPORTABLE

             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

              CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

         CIVIL APEPAL NOS. 10289-10303 OF 2003


Union of India and Ors.                 .....Appellants

                             versus

M/s Dharamendra Textile
Processors and Ors.                          .....
Respondents



Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 11431 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 12881 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 13123 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 13146 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 13766 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 14001 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 14164 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.1420 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 15485 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 1643/2008
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 16940 of 2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 17105 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 17121 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 17130 of 2007



                               1
Civil Appeal No.1901/2008
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 19704 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 21751 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 21829 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 23274 of 2004
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 23593 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 23801 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 25122 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 25123 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 2730 of 2006


Civil Appeal No. 2793 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C) No. 3329 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.3388 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 3397 of 2003
Civil Appeal Nos. 3398-3399 of 2003
Civil Appeal No. 4096 of 2004
Civil Appeal No. 4311 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4316 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4317 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4320 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4321 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4322 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4323 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4324 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4331 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 4332 of 2007

                                2
Civil Appeal No. 4333 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.            /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 5171 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.            /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 5172 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.            /08@ SLP (C ) No. 5177 of 2007
Civil Appeal No. 5272 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 5277 of 2006
Civil Appeal No. 6001 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6297/2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6315/2007
Civil Appeal No. 675 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6879/2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 7427/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 809/2008
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 9529/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 9531/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 9532/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 9533/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 9534/2006
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6300/2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6303/2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 4663/2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 6304/2007
Civil Appeal No. 372 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.2146/2008
Civil Appeal No.1823 of 2008
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 3734 of 2007
Civil Appeal No.          /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 19789 of 2007


                               3
Civil Appeal No.           /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 14067/2007
Civil Appeal No.           /08 @ SLP (C ) No. 3880/2007
Civil Appeal No.4094/2004




                       JUDGMENT

Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.   Leave granted in the special leave petitions.

2.   A Division Bench of this Court has referred the

controversy involved in these appeals to a larger Bench

doubting the correctness of the view expressed in Dilip N.

Shroff v. Joint Commissioner of Income Tax, Mumbai and Anr.

(2007 (8) SCALE 304).        The question which arises for

determination in all these appeals is whether Section 11AC of

the Central Excise Act, 1944 (in short the `Act') inserted by

Finance Act, 1996 with the intention of imposing mandatory

penalty on persons who evaded payment of tax should be read



                              4
to contain mens rea as an essential ingredient and whether

there is a scope for levying penalty below the prescribed

minimum.    Before the Division Bench, stand of the revenue

was that said section should be read as penalty for statutory

offence and the authority imposing penalty has no discretion

in the matter of imposition of penalty and the adjudicating

authority in such cases    was duty bound to impose penalty

equal to the duties so determined. The assessee on the other

hand referred to Section 271(1)(c) of the Income Tax Act, 1961

(in short the `IT Act') taking the stand that Section 11AC of the

Act is identically worded and in a given case it was open to the

assessing officer not to impose any penalty. The Division

Bench made reference to Rule 96ZQ and Rule 96ZO of the

Central Excise Rules, 1944 (in short the `Rules') and a

decision of this Court in Chairman, SEBI v. Shriram Mutual

Fund and Anr. (2006 (5) SCC 361) and was of the view that

the basic scheme for imposition of penalty under Section 271

(1)(c) of IT Act, Section 11AC of the Act and Rule 96ZQ(5) of

the Rules is common. According to the Division Bench the

correct position in law was laid down in Chairman, SEBI's

                              5
case (supra) and not in Dilip Shroff's case (supra). Therefore,

the matter was referred to a larger Bench.

3.   It was noted that in some cases the assessee had

challenged the vires of Rule 96ZQ(5) and the Gujarat High

Court held that the said rule incorporated the requirement of

mens rea. The Division Bench       clarified that if the larger

bench takes a view to say that the penalty leviable under the

said clause is mandatory, it is still open to the assessee to

challenge the vires of Rule 96ZQ(5).

4.   During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the

parties agreed that a similar issue is involved in respect of

Rule 96ZO.

5.   Mr. Chandrashekharan, Additional Solicitor General

submitted that in Rules 96ZQ and 96ZO there is no reference

to any mens rea as in Section 11AC where mens rea is

prescribed statutorily. This is clear from the extended period

of limitation permissible under Section 11A of the Act. It is in


                              6
essence submitted that the penalty is for statutory offence. It

is pointed out that the proviso to Section 11A deals with the

time for initiation of action. Section 11AC is only a mechanism

for computation and the quantum of penalty. It is stated that

the consequences of fraud etc. relate to the extended period of

limitation and the onus is on the revenue to establish that the

extended period of limitation is applicable. Once that hurdle is

crossed by the revenue, the assessee is exposed to penalty

and the quantum of penalty is fixed. It is pointed out that

even if in some statutes mens rea is specifically provided for,

so is the limit or imposition of penalty, that is the maximum

fixed or the quantum has to be between two limits fixed. In

the cases at hand, there is no variable and, therefore, no

discretion. It is pointed out that prior to insertion of Section

11AC, Rule 173Q was in vogue in which no mens rea was

provided for. It only stated "which he knows or has reason to

believe". The said clause referred to wilful action. According to

learned counsel what was inferentially provided in some

respects in Rule 173Q, now stands explicitly provided in

Section 11AC. Where the outer limit of penalty is fixed and the

                              7
statute provides that it should not exceed a particular limit,

that itself indicates scope for discretion but that is not the

case here.

6.   It was pointed out that Rule 96ZO refers to manufacturer

of ingots and billets while Rule 96ZQ relates to independent

processor of textile fabrics. They belong to the same category

and failure to pay duty attracts penal consequences. In the

other category in cases of fraud etc. penalty is for statutory

offence. It is pointed out that in Dilip Shroff's case (supra) the

question relating to discretion was not the basic issue. In fact,

Section 271(1)(c) of the I.T. Act provides for some discretion

and, therefore, that decision has no relevance. So far as the

present dispute is concerned, whether discretion has been

properly exercised is a question of fact. It is submitted that

Chairman SEBI's case (supra) has full application to the facts

of the present case.

7.   In reply, learned counsel for the respondent submitted

that the factual scenario in each case has to be examined. In


                               8
cases relatable to Section 11AC of the Act, the Appellate

Tribunal in some of the cases has come to a finding that there

was no wilful disregard involved and the assessee's conduct

was bona fide. It is pointed out that Section 11A relates to the

expression "assessee shall be liable" and, therefore, there is

discretion to reduce the penalty. With reference to Sections

271C and 271B of the I.T. Act, it is pointed out that in the

case of former it is "liable" while in the latter it is "shall pay".

Reference is also made to Sections 271F and 272A of the said

I.T. Act. Reliance is placed on a decision of this Court in State

of M.P. and Ors. v. Bharat Heavy Electricals (1997 (7) SCC 1)

to contend that even if this Court held that it appears to give

the expression that the imposition of penalty is mandatory, yet

there was a scope for exercise of discretion.

8.   It is submitted that various degrees of culpability cannot

be placed on the same pedestal. Section 11AC can be

construed in a manner by reading into it the discretion. That

would be the proper way to give effect to the statutory




                                9
intention.    The relevant provisions i.e. Section 11AC, Rule

96ZQ and Rule 96ZO read as follows:

             "11AC- Penalty for short levy or non levy of
             duty in certain cases- Where any duty of
             excise has not been levied or paid or has been
             short levied or short paid or erroneously
             refunded by reasons of fraud, collusion or any
             wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts,
             or contravention of any of the provisions of
             this Act or of the rules made thereunder with
             intent to evade payment of duty, the person
             who is liable to pay duty as determined under
             sub-section (2) of section 11A, shall also be
             liable to pay a penalty equal to the duty so
             determined.

                   Provided that where such duty as
             determined under sub-section (2) of section
             11A, and the interest payable thereon under
             section 11AB, is paid within thirty days from
             the date of communication of the order of the
             Central Excise Officer determining such duty,
             the amount of penalty liable to be paid by
             such person under this Section be twenty-five
             per cent of the duty so determined:

                  Provided further that the benefit of
             reduced penalty under the first proviso shall
             be available if the amount of penalty so
             determined has also been paid within the
             period of thirty days referred to in that proviso:

                  Provided also that where the duty
             determined to be payable is reduced or
             increased by the Commissioner (Appeals), the
             Appellate Tribunal or, as the case may be, the

                                 10
          court, then for the purposes of this section,
          the duty, as reduced or increased, as the case
          may be shall be taken into account:

                Provided also that in case where the
          duty determined to be payable is increased by
          the Commissioner (Appeals), the Appellate
          Tribunal or, as the case may be, the court
          then the benefit of reduced penalty under the
          first proviso shall be available, if the amount of
          duty so increased, the interest payable thereon
          and twenty five per cent, of the consequential
          increase of penalty have also been paid within
          thirty days of the communication of the order
          by which such increase in the duty takes
          effect.

                 Explanation- For the removal of doubts,
          it is hereby declared that-

                (1) the provisions of this section shall
          also apply to cases in which the order
          determining the duty under sub-section (2) of
          section 11A, relates to notices issued prior to
          the date on which the Finance Act, 2000
          receives the assent of the President;

(2)   any amount paid to the credit of the Central
      Government prior to the date of communication of
      the order referred to in the first proviso or the
      fourth proviso shall be adjusted against the total
      amount due from such person.

          RULE 96ZO. Procedure to be followed by
          the manufacturer of ingots and billets

          (1) A manufacturer of non-alloy steel ingots

                              11
and billets falling under sub- heading Nos.
7206.90 and 7207.90 of the Schedule to the
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986),
shall debit an amount calculated at the rate of
Rs. 750 per metric tone at the time of
clearance of ingots and billets of non-alloy
steel from his factory in the account-current
maintained by him under sub-rule (1) of rule
173G of the Central Excise Rules, 1944,
subject to the condition that the total amount
of duty liability shall be calculated and paid in
the following manner :-

I. Total amount of duty liability for the period
from the 1st day of 1 September, 1997 to the
31st day of March, 1998



(a) a manufacturer shall pay a total amount
calculated at the rate of Rs. 750 per metric
tonne on capacity of production of his factory
for the period from 1st day of September, 1997
to the 31stday of March, 1998, as determined
under the Induction Furnace Annual Capacity
Determination Rules, 1997. This amount shall
be paid by 31st day of March, 1998;

(b) the amount of duty already paid, together
with on-account amount paid by the
manufacturer, if any, during the period from
1st day of September,1997 to the 31st day of
March, 1998, shall be adjusted towards the
total amount of duty liability payable under
clause (a);

                    12
(c) if a manufacturer fails to pay the total
amount of duty payable under clause (a) by
the 31st day of March, 1998, he shall be liable
to pay the outstanding amount (that is the
amount of duty which has not been (paid by
the 31st day of March, 1998) along with
interest at the rate of eighteen percent per
annum     on     such    outstanding   amount
calculated for the period from the 1st day of
April, 1998 till the date of actual payment of
the outstanding amount :

Provided that if the manufacturer fails to pay
the total amount of duty payable under clause
(a) by the 30th day of April, 1998, he shall also
be liable to pay a penalty equal to the
outstanding amount of duty as on 30th day of
April, 1998 or five thousand rupees, whichever
is greater.

II. Total amount of duty liability for a financial
year     subsequent    to    1997-98       (a)   a
manufacturer shall pay a total amount
calculated at the rate of Rs. 750/- per metric
tonne on the annual capacity of production of
his factory as determined under the Induction
Furnace Annual Capacity Determination
Rules, 1997. This amount shall be paid by the
31st day of March of the financial year;

(b) the amount of duty already paid, together
with on-account amount paid by the
manufacturer, if any, during the financial year
shall be adjusted towards the total amount of
duty liability;

                    13
(c) if a manufacturer fails to pay the total
amount of duty payable under clause (a) by
the 31st day of March, of the relevant financial
year, he shall be liable to, -

(i) pay the outstanding amount of duty (that is
the amount of duty which has not been paid
by the 31st day of March of the relevant
financial year) along with interest at the rate of
eighteen per cent. per annum on such
outstanding amount, calculated for the period
from the 1st day of April of the immediately
succeeding financial year till the date of actual
payment of the whole of outstanding amount;
and

(ii) a penalty equal to such outstanding
amount of duty or five thousand rupees,
whichever is greater.

(lA) If any manufacturer removes any of the
non-alloy steel ingots and billets specified in
sub-rule (I) without complying with the
requirements of the provisions of that sub-
rule, then all such goods shall be liable to
confiscation and the manufacturer shall be
liable to a penalty not exceeding three times
the value of such goods, or five thousand
rupees, whichever is greater



(2) Where a manufacturer does not produce
the ingots and billets of non- alloy steel during
any continuous period of not less than seven

                    14
days and wishes to claim abatement under
sub-section (3) of section 3A of the Central
Excise Act, 1944, the abatement will be
allowed by an order passed by the
Commissioner of Central Excise of such
amount as may be specified in such order,
subject to the fulfillment of the following
conditions, namely-

(a) the manufacturer shall inform in writing
about    the   closure   to the     1Assistant
Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise 1, with a copy
to the Superintendent of Central Excise, either
prior to the date of closure or on the date of
closure;

(b) the manufacturer shall intimate the
reading of the electricity meter to the Assistant
Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise1, with a copy
to the Superintendent of Central Excise,
immediately after the production in his factory
is stopped along with the closing balance of
stock of the ingots and billets of non-alloy
steel;

(c) the manufacturer, when he starts
production again, shall inform in writing about
the starting of production to the Assistant
Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise1, with a copy
to the Superintendent of Central Excise, either
prior to the date of starting production or on
the date of starting production;

(d)   the   manufacturer   shall   on   start   of


                    15
production again along with the closing
balance of stock on restarting the factory,
intimate the reading of the electricity meter to
the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise
or Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise1,
with a copy to the Superintendent of Central
Excise;

(e) the manufacturer shall while sending
intimation under clause (c), declare that his
factory remained closed for a continuous
period starting from --hours on -(date) to --
hours on -(date).

(3)   Notwithstanding       anything   contained
elsewhere in these rules, if a manufacturer
having a total furnace capacity of 3 metric
tonnes installed in his factory so desires, he
may, from the first day of September, 1997 to
the 31st day of March, 1998 or any other
financial year, as the case may be, pay a sum
of rupees five lakhs per month in two equal
installments, the first installment latest by the
15thday of each month, and the second
installment latest by the last day of each
month, and the amounts so paid shall be
deemed to be full and final discharge of his
duty liability for the period from the 1st day of
September, 1997 to the 31st day of March,
1998, or any other financial year, as the case
may be, subject to the condition that the
manufacturer shall not avail of the benefit, if
any, under sub-section (4) of the section 3A of
the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) :

Provided that for the month of September,
1997 the Commissioner may allow a


                    16
manufacturer to pay the sum of rupees five
lakhs by the 30th day of September, 1997:

Provided further that if the capacity of the
furnaces installed in a factory is more than or
less than 3 metric tonnes, or there is any
change in the total capacity, the manufacturer
shall pay the amount, calculated pro rata:

provided also that where a manufacturer fails
to pay the whole of the amount payable for any
month by the 15th day or the last day of such
month, as the case may be, he shall be liable
to,-

(i) pay the outstanding amount of duty along
with interest thereon at the rate of eighteen
per cent per annum, calculated for the period
from the 16th day of such month or the 1st
day of next month, as the case may be, till the
date of actual payment of the outstanding
amount; and

(ii) a penalty equal to such outstanding
amount of duty or five thousand rupees,
whichever is greater.

Provided that if the manufacturer fails to pay
the total amount of the duty payable for each
of the months from September, 1997 to March,
1998 by the 30th day of April, 1998, he shall
also be liable to pay a penalty equal to the
outstanding amount of duty as on 30th day of
April, 1998 or five thousand rupees, whichever
is greater.

                   17
Explanation - For removal of doubts it is
hereby clarified that sub-rule (3) does not
apply to an induction furnace unit which
ordinarily produces castings or stainless steel
products but may also incidentally produce
non-alloy steel ingots and billets.

(4) In case a manufacturer wishes to avail of
discharging his duty liability in terms of sub-
rule (3), he shall inform the Commissioner of
Central Excise, with a copy to the Assistant
Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise, in the
following proforma:

"We (name of the factory), located at (address)
hereby wish to avail of the scheme described
in sub-rule (3) of rule 9620, for full and final
discharge of our duty liability for the
manufacture of ingots and billets of non-alloy
steel undersection3A of the Central Excise Act,
1944 (l of 1944).

Dated


                                    Sd


                          Name and Designation


                          (With stamp)




                   18
RULE 96ZQ. Procedure to be followed by an
Independent processor of textile fabrics

(1) An independent processor of textile fabrics
falling        under         heading       Nos.
52.07,52.08,52.09,54.06,54.07,
55.11,55.12,55.13 or 55.14, or processed
textile fabrics of cotton or man-made fibers,
falling under heading Nos. or sub-heading
Nos. 58.01, 58.02, 5806.10, 5806.40.
6001.12,      6001.22,     6001.92,    6002.20,
6002.30, 6002.43 or 6002.93, of the First
Schedule to Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5
of 1986), shall debit an amount of duty of
Rs.2.0 lakhs per chamber per month,
Rs.2.5lakhs per chamber per month, Rs.3.0
lakhs per chamber per month or Rs.3.5 lakhs
per chamber per month, as the case may be,
on the annual capacity of production as
determined      under    the   Hot-air  Stenter
Independent      Textile   Processors   Annual
Capacity Determination Rules, 1998.

(2) The amount of duty payable under sub-rule
(1) shall be debited by the independent
processor in the account current maintained
by him sub-rule (1) of rule 173G of the Central
Excise Rules, 1944.

(3) Fifty per cent. of the amount of duty
payable for a calendar month under sub-rule
(1) shall be paid by the 15th of the month and
the remaining amount shall be paid by the end
of that month.

                   19
      Provided that the amount of duty payable
for the period from 16th December, 1998 to 31st
December, 1998 shall be deposited on or
before the 31st day of December, 1998.

(4) The independent processor shall continue
to maintain records, and file returns,
pertaining     to    production,     clearance,
manufacturing, storage, delivery or disposal of
goods, including the materials received for or
consumed in the manufacture of excisable
goods or other goods, the goods and materials
in stock with him and the duty paid by him, as
prescribed under the Central Excise Rules,
1944 and the notifications issued there under.

(5) If an independent processor fails to pay the
amount 0# duty or any part thereof by the
date specified in sub-rule (3), he shall be liable
to, -

(i) pay the outstanding amount of duty along
with interest at the rate of twenty-four percent
per annum calculated for the outstanding
period on the outstanding amount; and

(ii) a penalty equal to an amount of duty
outstanding from him at the end of such
month or rupees five thousand, whichever is
greater.

(6) If an independent processor, removes the
processed textile fabrics referred to in sub-rule
(1) without complying with any of the
requirements contained in sub-rule (4), then,
all such goods shall be liable to confiscation
and the independent processor shall be liable


                    20
to a penalty     not    exceeding   rupees   ten
thousand.

(7) Where an independent processor does not
produce or manufacture the processed textile
fabrics specified in sub-rule (1) during any
continuous period of not less than fifteen days
and wishes to claim abatement under sub-
section (3) of section 3A of the Act, the
abatement shall be allowed by an order passed
by the Joint Commissioner of Central Excise of
such amount as may be specified in such
order, subject to fulfillment of the following
conditions, namely: -

(a) abatement shall be applicable only on the
complete closure of the hot air stenter
containing the chambers and not in case of
closure of anyone or more chambers contained
in such stenter;

(aa) the independent processor shall not clear
any non-stentered fabrics during the period for
which abatement is claimed, and any
clearance by him of non-stentered fabrics
during such period shall be liable to
confiscation;

(b) the independent processor shall inform, in
writing, about such closure to the Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise or the
Assistant Com- missioner of Central Excise, as
the case may be, with a copy to the
Superintendent of Central Excise, at least
three days prior to the date of such closure,
giving the following details, namely: -

                   21
(i) the name of the manufacturer of the stenter;

(ii) the date of purchase of the stenter;

(iii) the number of chambers as determined
under the Hot-air Stenter Independent Textile
Processors Annual Capacity Determination
Rules, 2000;

(iv) the serial number or identification no. of
the stenter; (v) reason for closure of the
stenter;

(vi) approximate number of days for which the
stenter shall remain closed;

(vii) date and time from which the closure is
intended; (c) the stenter or stenters shall be
sealed in such manner as may be pre- scribed
by the Commissioner of Central Excise;

(d) the independent processor, when he starts
production again, shall in- form in writing
about the date of starting of production to the
Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise or the
Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, as
the case may be, with a copy to the
Superintendent of Central Excise, at least
three days prior to the date of starting
production, and get the seal opened in such
manner as may be specified by the
Commissioner of Central Excise before
recommencing the production;

                    22
(e) When the claim for abatement by the
independent processor is for a period less than
one month, he shall be required to pay the
duty, as applicable, for the entire period of one
month and may subsequently seek such claim
after payment of such duty;

(f) when the claim for abatement by the
independent processor is for a period of less
than one month or more, he shall not be
required to pay the duty for that period in
advance;

   (g) If the claim for abatement by the
independent processor has been disallowed by
the Joint Commissioner of Central Excise, by a
written order made in this regard, the
independent processor shall pay the duty ,
and interest if any applicable, prior to getting
the stenter or stenters sealed under condition
(c) re-opened for resuming production :

Provided that the Commissioner of Central
Excise may condone, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, the delay in giving prior
information under clause (b), if he is satisfied
that such delay in giving information was
caused due to unavoidable circumstances.

Explanation. -For the purposes of these rules,
an   "independent      processor"    means    a
manufacturer who is engaged primarily in the
processing of fabrics with the aid of power and


                    23
          who also has the facility in his factory
          (including plant and equipment) for carrying
          out heat-setting or drying, with the aid of
          power or steam in a hot-air stenter and who
          has no proprietary interest in any factory
          primarily and substantially engaged in the
          spinning of yarn or weaving or knitting of
          fabrics, on or after the 10th December, 1998.

     It would also be necessary to take note of Section 271(1)

( c) and Section 271C of the IT Act:

          "Section 271-FAILURE TO FURNISH
          RETURNS, COMPLY WITH NOTICES,
          CONCEALMENT OF INCOME, ETC.

          (1)  If  the  Assessing    Officer   or   the
          Commissioner (Appeals) in the course of any
          proceedings under this Act, is satisfied that
          any person -
          (a)   Omitted


          (b) Has failed to comply with a notice under
          sub-section (1) of section 142 or sub-section
          (2) of section 143 or fails to comply with a
          direction issued under sub-section (2A) of
          section 142; or




                              24
(c) Has concealed the particulars of his income
or furnished inaccurate particulars of such
income, he may direct that such person shall
pay by way of penalty, -

(i) Omitted


(ii) In the cases referred to in clause (b), in
addition to any tax payable by him, a sum
which shall not be less than one thousand
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees for each such failure;

(iii) In the cases referred to in clause (c), in
addition to any tax payable by him, a sum
which shall not be less than but which shall
not exceed three times the amount of tax
sought to be evaded by reason of the
concealment of particulars of his income or the
furnishing of inaccurate particulars of such
income :

Explanation 1 : Where in respect of any facts
material to the computation of the total
income of any person under this Act, -

(A) Such person fails to offer an explanation or
offers an explanation which is found by the
Assessing Officer or the Commissioner
(Appeals) to be false, or


(B) Such person offers an explanation which
he is not able to substantiate and fails to prove
that such explanation is bona fide and that all
the facts relating to the same and material to

                    25
the computation of his total income have been
disclosed by him, then, the amount added or
disallowed in computing the total income of
such person as a result thereof shall, for the
purposes of clause (c) of this sub-section be
deemed to represent the income in respect of
which particulars have been concealed.

Explanation 2 : Where the source of any
receipt, deposit, outgoing or investment in any
assessment year is claimed by any person to
be an amount which had been added in
computing the income or deducted in
computing the loss in the assessment of such
person for any earlier assessment year or
years but in respect of which no penalty under
clause (iii) of this sub-section had been levied,
that part of the amount so added or deducted
in such earlier assessment year immediately
preceding the year in which the receipt,
deposit, outgoing or investment appears (such
earlier assessment year hereafter in this
Explanation referred to as the first preceding
year) which is sufficient to cover the amount
represented by such receipt, deposit or
outgoing or value of such investment (such
amount or value hereafter in this Explanation
referred to as the utilised amount) shall be
treated as the income of the assessee,
particulars of which had been concealed or
inaccurate particulars of which had been
furnished for the first preceding year; and
where the amount so added or deducted in the
first preceding year is not sufficient to cover
the utilised amount, that part of the amount
so added or deducted in the year immediately
preceding the first preceding year which is
sufficient to cover such part of the utilised


                    26
amount as is not so covered shall be treated to
be the income of the assessee, particulars of
which had been concealed or inaccurate
particulars of which had been furnished for
the year immediately preceding the first
preceding year and so on, until the entire
utilised amount is covered by the amounts so
added or deducted in such earlier assessment
years.

Explanation 3 : Where any person who has not
previously been assessed under this Act, fails,
without reasonable cause, to furnish within
the period specified in sub-section (1) of
section 153 a return of his income which he is
required to furnish under section 139 in
respect of any assessment year commencing
on or after the 1st day of April, 1989, and,
until the expiry of the period aforesaid, no
notice has been issued to him under clause (i)
of sub-section (1) of section 142 or section 148
and the Assessing Officer or the Commissioner
  (Appeals) is satisfied that in respect of such
assessment year such person has taxable
income, then, such person shall, for the
purposes of clause (c) of this sub-section, be
deemed to have concealed the particulars of
his income in respect of such assessment year,
notwithstanding that such person furnishes a
return of his income at any time after the
expiry of the period aforesaid in pursuance of
a notice under section 148.

Explanation 4 : For the purpose of clause (iii)
of this sub-section, the expression "the
amount of tax sought to be evaded", - (a) In
any case where the amount of income in


                   27
respect of which particulars have been
concealed or inaccurate particulars have been
furnished exceeds the total income assessed,
means the tax that would have been
chargeable on the income in respect of which
particulars have been concealed or inaccurate
particulars have been furnished had such
income been the total income;

(b) In any case to which Explanation 3 applies,
means the tax on the total income assessed;

(c) In any other case, means the difference
between the tax on the total income assessed
and the tax that would have been chargeable
had such total income been reduced by the
amount of income in respect of which
particulars have been concealed or inaccurate
particulars have been furnished.

Explanation 5 : Where in the course of a
search under section 132, the assessee is
found to be the owner of any money, bullion,
jewellery or other valuable article or thing
(hereafter in this Explanation referred to as
assets) and the assessee claims that such
assets have been acquired by him by utilising
(wholly or in part) his income, - (a) For any
previous year which has ended before the date
of the search, but the return of income for
such year has not been furnished before the
said date, or, where such return has been
furnished before the said date, such income
has not been declared therein; or (b) for any
previous year which is to end on or after the
date of the search, then, notwithstanding that
such income is declared by him in any return

                   28
of income furnished on or after the date of the
search, he shall, for the purposes of imposition
of a penalty under clause (c) of sub-section (1)
of this section, be deemed to have concealed
the particulars of his income or furnished
inaccurate particulars of such income,


Unless, - (1) Such income is, or the
transactions resulting in such income are
recorded, - (i) In a case falling under clause
(a), before the date of the search; and


(ii) In a case falling under clause (b), on or
before such date, in the books of account, if
any, maintained by him for any source of
income or such income is otherwise disclosed
to the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner
before the said date; or


(2) He, in the course of the search, makes a
statement under sub-section (4) of section 132
that any money, bullion, jewellery or other
valuable article or thing found in his
possession or under his control, has been
acquired out of his income which has not been
disclosed so far in his return of income to be
furnished before the expiry of time specified in
sub-section (1) of section 139, and also
specifies in the statement the manner in which
such income has been derived and pays the
tax together with interest, if any, in respect of
such income.

Explanation 6 : Where any adjustment is made
in the income or loss declared in the return
under the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section
(1) of section 143 and additional tax charged

                    29
          under that section, the provisions of this sub-
          section shall not apply in relation to the
          adjustment so made.

          Section 271C


          PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO DEDUCT TAX
          AT SOURCE.

          (1) If any person fails to - (a) Deduct the whole
          or any part of the tax as required by or under
          the provisions of Chapter XVII-B; or


          (b) Pay the whole or any part of the tax as
          required by or under, - (i) Sub-section (2) of
          section 115-O; or


          (ii) Second proviso to section 194B, then, such
          person shall be liable to pay, by way of
          penalty, a sum equal to the amount of tax
          which such person failed to deduct or pay as
          aforesaid.

          (2) Any penalty imposable under sub-section
          (1)  shall  be    imposed  by   the   Joint
          Commissioner.

9.   It is to be noted that in Chairman SEBI's case (supra)

reference was made to the statutory scheme. It was noted that

the penalty was mandatory. It was pointed out that there was


                              30
a scheme attracting imposition of penalty. With reference to a

statute relating to breach of civil obligation, Section 9 of the

Act in that case related to criminal proceedings.

10.   In Chairman, SEBI's case (supra) it was noted as follows:

              14. Mr Rao advanced elaborate arguments
           and took us through the pleadings, the reply
           received to the show-cause notice, the orders
           of the adjudicating authority and of the
           Appellate Tribunal. He drew our specific
           attention to Regulation 25(7)(a) of the
           Securities and Exchange Board of India
           (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996 and
           Sections 15-D(b), 15-E, 15-I, 15-J and 12-B of
           the SEBI Act, 1992 which are extracted
           hereunder:
              "25. Asset management company and its
           obligations.--(1)-(6) * * *
             7. (a) An asset management company shall
           not through any broker associated with the
           sponsor, purchase or sell securities, which is
           average of 5% or more of the aggregate
           purchases and sale of securities made by the
           mutual fund in all its schemes:
              Provided that for the purpose of this sub-
           regulation, aggregate purchase and sale of
           security shall exclude sale and distribution of
           units issued by the mutual fund:

                              31
  Provided further that the aforesaid limit of
5% shall apply for a block of any three
months."
  "15-D. Penalty for certain defaults in case of
mutual funds.--If any person, who is--
  (a)*     *     *
   (b) registered with the Board as a collective
investment scheme, including mutual funds,
for sponsoring or carrying on any investment
scheme, fails to comply with the terms and
conditions of certificate of registration, he shall
be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees for
each day during which such failure continues
or one crore rupees, whichever is less;
     *     *     *


   15-E. Penalty for failure to observe rules and
regulations by an asset management company.
--Where any asset management company of a
mutual fund registered under this Act fails to
comply with any of the regulations providing
for restrictions on the activities of the asset
management        companies,       such      asset
management company shall be liable to a
penalty of one lakh rupees for each day during
which such failure continues or one crore
rupees, whichever is less.
     *     *     *
   15-I. Power to adjudicate.--(1) For the
purpose of adjudging under Sections 15-A, 15-
B, 15-C, 15-D, 15-E, 15-F, 15-G and 15-H, the
Board shall appoint any officer not below the
rank of a Division Chief to be an adjudicating
officer for holding an inquiry in the prescribed
manner after giving any person concerned a



                     32
reasonable opportunity of being heard for the
purpose of imposing any penalty.

       (2) While holding an inquiry the
adjudicating officer shall have power to
summon and enforce the attendance of any
person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case to give evidence or
to produce any document which in the opinion
of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or
relevant to the subject-matter of the inquiry
and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the
person has failed to comply with the provisions
of any of the sections specified in sub-section
(1), he may impose such penalty as he thinks
fit in accordance with the provisions of any of
those sections.
  15-J. Factors to be taken into account by the
adjudicating officer.--While adjudging the
quantum of penalty under Section 15-I, the
adjudicating officer shall have due regard to
the following factors, namely--
   (a) the amount of disproportionate gain or
unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made
as a result of the default;
   (b) the amount of loss caused to an investor
or group of investors as a result of the default;
  (c) the repetitive nature of the default."

  xxx                xxx                       xxx


   19. The scheme of the SEBI Act of imposing
penalty is very clear. Chapter VI-A nowhere
deals with criminal offences. These defaults for
failures are nothing but failure or default of


                    33
statutory civil obligations provided under the
Act and the Regulations made thereunder. It is
pertinent to note that Section 24 of the SEBI
Act deals with the criminal offences under the
Act and its punishment. Therefore, the
proceedings under Chapter VI-A are neither
criminal nor quasi-criminal. The penalty
leviable under this chapter or under these
sections is penalty in cases of default or failure
of statutory obligation or in other words
breach of civil obligation. In the provisions and
scheme of penalty under Chapter VI-A of the
SEBI Act, there is no element of any criminal
offence or punishment as contemplated under
criminal proceedings. Therefore, there is no
question of proof of intention or any mens rea
by the appellants and it is not an essential
element for imposing penalty under the SEBI
Act and the Regulations.

  xxx                  xxx                    xxx


   33. This Court in a catena of decisions has
held that mens rea is not an essential element
for imposing penalty for breach of civil
obligations:
(a) Director of Enforcement v. MCTM Corpn. (P)
Ltd.: (SCC pp. 478 &amp; 480-81, paras 8 &amp; 12-
13)
   "8. It is thus the breach of a `civil obligation'
which attracts `penalty' under Section 23(1)(a),
FERA, 1947 and a finding that the delinquent
has contravened the provisions of Section 10,
FERA, 1947 that would immediately attract
the levy of `penalty' under Section 23,
irrespective    of    the  fact     whether      the
contravention was made by the defaulter with

                     34
any `guilty intention' or not. Therefore, unlike
in a criminal case, where it is essential for the
`prosecution' to establish that the `accused'
had the necessary guilty intention or in other
words the requisite `mens rea' to commit the
alleged offence with which he is charged before
recording his conviction, the obligation on the
part of the Directorate of Enforcement, in
cases of contravention of the provisions of
Section 10 of FERA, would be discharged
where it is shown that the `blameworthy
conduct' of the delinquent had been
established by wilful contravention by him of
the provisions of Section 10, FERA, 1947. It is
the delinquency of the defaulter itself which
establishes    his    `blameworthy'    conduct,
attracting the provisions of Section 23(1)(a) of
FERA, 1947 without any further proof of the
existence of `mens rea'. Even after an
adjudication by the authorities and levy of
penalty under Section 23(1)(a) of FERA, 1947,
the defaulter can still be tried and punished
for the commission of an offence under the
penal law.....

          xx               xx              xx


  12. In Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol. 85, at p.
      580, para 1023, it is stated thus:
  `A penalty imposed for a tax delinquency is
a civil obligation, remedial and coercive in its
nature, and is far different from the penalty for
a crime or a fine or forfeiture provided as
punishment for the violation of criminal or
penal laws.'




                    35
   13. We are in agreement with the aforesaid
view and in our opinion, what applies to `tax
delinquency' equally holds good for the
`blameworthy' conduct for contravention of the
provisions of FERA, 1947. We, therefore, hold
that mens rea (as is understood in criminal
law) is not an essential ingredient for holding a
delinquent liable to pay penalty under Section
23(1)(a) of FERA, 1947 for contravention of the
provisions of Section 10 of FERA, 1947 and
that penalty is attracted under Section 23(1)(a)
as soon as contravention of the statutory
obligation contemplated by Section 10(1)(a) is
established. The High Court apparently fell in
error in treating the `blameworthy conduct'
under the Act as equivalent to the commission
of a `criminal offence', overlooking the position
that the `blameworthy conduct' in the
adjudicatory proceedings is established by
proof only of the breach of a civil obligation
under the Act, for which the defaulter is
obliged to make amends by payment of the
penalty imposed under Section 23(1)(a) of the
Act irrespective of the fact whether he
committed the breach with or without any
guilty intention."

(b) J.K. Industries Ltd. v. Chief Inspector of
Factories and Boilers: (SCC p. 692, para 42)

   "42. The offences under the Act are not a
part of general penal law but arise from the
breach of a duty provided in a special
beneficial social defence legislation, which
creates absolute or strict liability without proof
of any mens rea. The offences are strict
statutory offences for which establishment of
mens rea is not an essential ingredient. The


                    36
omission or commission of the statutory
breach is itself the offence. Similar type of
offences based on the principle of strict
liability, which means liability without fault or
mens rea, exist in many statutes relating to
economic crimes as well as in laws concerning
the industry, food adulteration, prevention of
pollution, etc. in India and abroad. `Absolute
offences' are not criminal offences in any real
sense but acts which are prohibited in the
interest of welfare of the public and the
prohibition is backed by sanction of penalty."

c) R.S. Joshi v. Ajit Mills Ltd.: (SCC p. 110, para
19)

   "Even here we may reject the notion that a
penalty or a punishment cannot be cast in the
form of an absolute or no-fault liability but
must be preceded by mens rea. The classical
view that `no mens rea, no crime' has long ago
been eroded and several laws in India and
abroad, especially regarding economic crimes
and departmental penalties, have created
severe punishments even where the offences
have been defined to exclude mens rea.
Therefore, the contention that Section 37(1)
fastens a heavy liability regardless of fault has
no force in depriving the forfeiture of the
character of penalty."

(d) Gujarat Travancore Agency v. CIT: (SCC p.
     55, para 4)

   "It is sufficient for us to refer to Section 271
(1)(a), which provides that a penalty may be


                    37
imposed if the Income Tax Officer is satisfied
that any person has without reasonable cause
failed to furnish the return of total income,
and to Section 276-C which provides that if a
person wilfully fails to furnish in due time the
return of income required under Section 139
(1), he shall be punishable with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year or with fine. It is clear that in the
former case what is intended is a civil
obligation while in the latter what is imposed
is a criminal sentence. There can be no
dispute that having regard to the provisions of
Section 276-C, which speaks of wilful failure
on the part of the defaulter and taking into
consideration the nature of the penalty, which
is punitive, no sentence can be imposed under
that provision unless the element of mens rea
is established. In most cases of criminal
liability, the intention of the legislature is that
the penalty should serve as a deterrent. The
creation of an offence by statute proceeds on
the assumption that society suffers injury by
the act or omission of the defaulter and that a
deterrent must be imposed to discourage the
repetition of the offence. In the case of a
proceeding under Section 271(1)(a), however, it
seems that the intention of the legislature is to
emphasise the fact of loss of revenue and to
provide a remedy for such loss, although no
doubt an element of coercion is present in the
penalty. In this connection the terms in which
the penalty falls to be measured is significant.
Unless there is something in the language of
the statute indicating the need to establish the
element of mens rea it is generally sufficient to
prove that a default in complying with the
statute has occurred. In our opinion, there is
nothing in Section 271(1)(a) which requires

                    38
that mens rea must be proved before penalty
can be levied under that provision



Swedish Match AB v. SEBI: (SCC p. 671, para
113)


   "The provisions of Section 15-H of the Act
mandate that a penalty of rupees twenty-five
crores may be imposed. The Board does not
have any discretion in the matter and, thus,
the adjudication proceeding is a mere
formality. Imposition of penalty upon the
appellant would, thus, be a forgone
conclusion. Only in the criminal proceedings
initiated against the appellants, existence of
mens rea on the part of the appellants will
come up for consideration."
 (f) SEBI v. Cabot International Capital Corpn:
(Comp Cas pp.        862 &amp; 864-65, paras 47,
52 &amp; 54)
  "47. Thus, the following extracted principles
are summarised:

   (A) Mens rea is an essential or sine qua non
for criminal offence.

  (B) A straitjacket formula of mens rea
cannot be blindly followed in each and every
case. The scheme of a particular statute may
be diluted in a given case.

  (C) If, from the scheme, object and words
used in the statute, it appears that the
proceedings for imposition of the penalty are
adjudicatory in nature, in contradistinction to


                   39
criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings, the
determination is of the breach of the civil
obligation by the offender. The word `penalty'
by itself will not be determinative to conclude
the nature of proceedings being criminal or
quasi-criminal. The relevant considerations
being the nature of the functions being
discharged by the authority and the
determination      of  the   liability  of  the
contravenor and the delinquency.

   (D) Mens rea is not essential element for
imposing penalty for breach of civil obligations
or liabilities.

  (There can be two distinct liabilities, civil
and criminal under the same Act.

     xx              xx              xx

   52. The SEBI Act and the Regulations, are
intended to regulate the securities market and
the related aspects, the imposition of penalty,
in the given facts and circumstances of the
case, cannot be tested on the ground of `no
mens rea, no penalty'. For breaches of
provisions of the SEBI Act and Regulations,
according to us, which are civil in nature,
mens rea is not essential. On particular facts
and circumstances of the case, proper exercise
of judicial discretion is a must, but not on
foundation that mens rea is essential to
impose penalty in each and every breach of
provisions of the SEBI Act.
     *    *     *




                    40
              54. However, we are not in agreement with
           the Appellate Authority in respect of the
           reasoning given in regard to the necessity of
           mens rea being essential for imposing the
           penalty. According to us, mens rea is not
           essential for imposing civil penalties under the
           SEBI Act and Regulations."      (emphasis     in
           original)




11.   The decision in Bharat Heavy Electricals's case (supra)

cannot be of any assistance to the assessee because the same

proceeded on the basis of concession. Even otherwise, it was

not open to the Bench to read, into a statute which was

specific and clear, something which is not specifically provided

for in the statute.

12.   The stand of learned counsel for the assessee is that the

absence of specific reference to mens rea is a case of casus

omissus. If the contention of learned counsel for the assessee

is accepted that the use of the expression "assessee shall be

liable" proves the existence of discretion, it would lead to a

very absurd result. In fact in the same provision there is an



                              41
expression used i.e. "liability to pay duty". It can by no stretch

of imagination be said that the adjudicating authority has

even a discretion to levy duty less than what is legally and

statutorily leviable. Most of cases relied upon by learned

counsel for the assessee had their foundation on Bharat

Heavy Electrical's case (supra). As noted above, the same is

based on concession and in any event did not indicate the

correct position in law.

13.   It is a well-settled principle in law that the court cannot

read anything into a statutory provision or a stipulated

condition which is plain and unambiguous. A statute is an

edict of the legislature. The language employed in a statute is

the determinative factor of legislative intent. Similar is the

position for conditions stipulated in advertisements.

14.   Words and phrases are symbols that stimulate mental

references to referents. The object of interpreting a statute is

to ascertain the intention of the legislature enacting it. (See

                               42
Institute of Chartered Accountants of India v. Price Waterhouse

1977 6 SCC 312). The intention of the legislature is primarily

to be gathered from the language used, which means that

attention should be paid to what has been said as also to what

has not been said. As a consequence, a construction which

requires for its support, addition or substitution of words or

which results in rejection of words as meaningless has to be

avoided. As observed in Crawford v. Spooner (1846) 6 MOO

PC1, the courts cannot aid the legislature's defective phrasing

of an Act, they cannot add or mend, and by construction make

up deficiencies which are left there. (See State of Gujarat v.

Dilipbhai Nathjibhai Patel 1998 (3) SCC 234). It is contrary to

all rules of construction to read words into an Act unless it is

absolutely necessary to do so. [See Stock v. Frank Jones

(Tipton) Ltd 1978 (1) ALL ER 948.] Rules of interpretation do

not permit the courts to do so, unless the provision as it

stands is meaningless or of doubtful meaning. The courts are

not entitled to read words into an Act of Parliament unless

clear reason for it is to be found within the four corners of the

Act itself. (Per Lord Loreburn, L.C. in Vickers Sons")

                               43
15.   The question is not what may be supposed and has been

intended but what has been said. "Statutes should be

construed not as theorems of Euclid", Judge Learned Hand

said, "but words must be construed with some imagination of

the purposes which lie behind them". (See Lenigh Valley Coal

Co. v. Yensavage 218 FR 547) The view was reiterated in Union

of India v. Filip Tiago De Gama of Vedem Vasco De Gama

(1990) 1 SCC 277 (SCC p.        284, para 16).

16.   In D.R. Venkatachalam v. Dy. Transport Commr. (1977) 2

SCC 273, it was observed that the courts must avoid the

danger of a priori determination of the meaning of a provision

based on their own preconceived notions of ideological

structure or scheme into which the provision to be interpreted

is somewhat fitted. They are not entitled to usurp legislative

function under the disguise of interpretation.

                              44
17.   While interpreting a provision the court only interprets

the law and cannot legislate it. If a provision of law is misused

and subjected to the abuse of process of law, it is for the

legislature to amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary.

(See CST v. Popular Trading Co. (2000) 5 SCC 511) The

legislative casus omissus cannot be supplied by judicial

interpretative process.

18.   Two principles of construction - one relating to casus

omissus and the other in regard to reading the statute as a

whole, appear to be well settled. Under the first principle a

casus omissus cannot be supplied by the court except in the

case of clear necessity and when reason for it is found in the

four corners of the statute itself but at the same time a casus

omissus should not be readily inferred and for that purpose

all the parts of a statute or section must be construed together

and every clause of a section should be construed with

reference to the context and other clauses thereof so that the

construction to be put on a particular provision makes a

consistent enactment of the whole statute. This would be more


                              45
so if literal construction of a particular clause leads to

manifestly absurd or anomalous results which could not have

been intended by the legislature. "An intention to produce an

unreasonable result", said Danckwerts, L.J. in Artemiou v.

Procopiou (1965) 3 ALL ER 539 (All ER p. 544 I) "is not to be

imputed to a statute if there is some other construction

available". Where to apply words literally would "defeat the

obvious intention of the legislation and produce a wholly

unreasonable result", we must "do some violence to the

words" and so achieve that obvious intention and produce a

rational construction. [Per Lord Reid in Luke v. IRC (1963) AC

557 where at AC p. 577 he also observed: (All ER p.664 I)

"This is not a new problem, though our standard of drafting is

such.

19.   It is then true that:

           "When the words of a law extend not to an
           inconvenience rarely happening, but due to
           those which often happen, it is good reason
           not to strain the words further than they
           reach, by saying it is casus omissus, and that
           the law intended quae frequentius accidunt."

                              46
"But", on the other hand,

           "it is no reason, when the words of a law do
           enough extend to an inconvenience seldom
           happening, that they should not extend to it as
           well as if it happened more frequently, because
           it happens but seldom". (See Fenton v.
           Hampton (1858) 11 MOO PC 347).

20.   A   casus   omissus   ought   not   to   be   created   by

interpretation, save in some case of strong necessity. Where,

however, a casus omissus does really occur, either through

the inadvertence of the legislature, or on the principle quod

enim semel aut bis existit praetereunt legislatores, the rule is

that the particular case, thus left unprovided for, must be

disposed of according to the law as it existed before such

statute - casus omissus et oblivioni datus dispositioni

communis juris relinquitur; "a casus omissus", observed

Buller, J. in Jones v. Smart 1785 (1) TR 44:99 ER 963 (ER p.

967) "can in no case be supplied by a court of law, for that

would be to make laws". The principles were examined in




                              47
detail in Maulavi Hussein Haji Abraham Umarji v. State of

Gujarat (2004 (6) SCC 672).

21.   The golden rule for construing all written instruments

has been thus stated:

           "The grammatical and ordinary sense of the
           words is to be adhered to unless that would
           lead to some absurdity or some repugnance or
           inconsistency with the rest of the instrument,
           in which case the grammatical and ordinary
           sense of the words may be modified, so as to
           avoid that absurdity and inconsistency, but no
           further." (See Grey v. Pearson.)



22.   The latter part of this "golden rule" must, however, be

applied with much caution. "If", remarked Jervis, C.J.,


           "the precise words used are plain and
           unambiguous, in our judgment, we are bound
           to construe them in their ordinary sense, even
           though it do lead, in our view of the case, to an
           absurdity or manifest injustice. Words may be
           modified or varied, where their import is
           doubtful or obscure. But we assume the
           functions of legislators when we depart from
           the ordinary meaning of the precise words
           used, merely, because we see, or fancy we see,
           an absurdity or manifest injustice from an



                               48
           adherence to their literal meaning". (See Abley
           v. Dale, ER p.525)



23.   The above position was highlighted in Sangeeta Singh v.

Union of India and Ors. (2005 (7) SCC 484).

24.   It is of significance to note that the conceptual and

contextual difference between Section 271(1) (c) and Section

276C of the IT Act was lost sight of in Dilip Shroff's case

(supra).

25.   The Explanations appended to Section 272(1)(c) of the IT

Act entirely indicates the element of strict liability on the

assessee for concealment or for giving inaccurate particulars

while filing return.   The judgment in Dilp N. Shroof's case

(supra) has not considered the effect and relevance of Section

276C of the I.T. Act. Object behind enactment of Section 271

(1)(e) read with Explanations indicate that the said section has

been enacted to provide for a remedy for loss of revenue. The

penalty under that provision is a civil liability.        Wilful



                              49
concealment is not an essential ingredient for attracting civil

liability as is the case in the matter of prosecution under

Section 276C of the I.T. Act.

26.   In Union Budget of 1996-97, Section 11AC of the Act was

introduced. It has made the position clear that there is no

scope for any discretion. In para 136 of the Union Budget

reference has been made to the provision stating that the levy

of penalty is a mandatory penalty. In the Notes on Clauses

also the similar indication has been given.

27.   Above being the position, the plea that the Rules 96ZQ

and 96ZO have a concept of discretion inbuilt cannot be

sustained.    Dilip Shroff's case (supra) was not correctly

decided but Chairman, SEBI's case (supra) has analysed the

legal position in the correct perspectives. The reference is

answered. The mater shall now be placed before the Division

Bench to deal with the matter in the light of what has been

stated above, only so far as the cases where challenge to vires

of Rule 967Q(5).    In all other cases the orders of the High


                                50
Court or the Tribunal, as the case may be, are quashed and

the matter remitted to it for disposal in the light of present

judgments. Appeals except Civil Appeal Nos. 3388 of 2006,

3397 of 2003, 3398-99 of 2003, 4096 of 2004, 4316 of 2007,

4317 of 2007, 5277 of 2006, 675 of 2007, 1420 of 2007 and

appeal relating to SLP (C ) No.21751 of 2007 are allowed and

the excepted appeals shall now be placed before the Division

Bench for disposal.

                                    ...................................J.
                                    (Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT)



                                    ...................................J.
                                    (P. SATHASIVAM)



                                    ...................................J.
                                    (AFTAB ALAM)
New Delhi,
September 29, 2008




                             51

