
Supreme Court of India
Kanchan Devi vs Shree Vishnu R.F.&amp;Oil; ... on 13 August, 2008Author: ....................J.
Bench: Altamas Kabir, Markandey Katju
                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                               CIVIL APPEAL NO.5043 OF 2008
                     [Arising out of SLP(C)No.2909 of 2006]



KANCHAN DEVI                          Appellant(s)

     VERSUS

SHREE VISHNU R.F.&amp;OIL MILLS(P)LTD.&amp;ORS.                  Respondent(s)


                                         ORDER

              Leave granted.

              This appeal is directed against the order passed by the High Court in

Company Appeal No.5 of 2005, whereby the order passed by the learned Company

Judge rejecting the appellant's appeal for release of the two shop rooms in

question, has been upheld.

              On behalf of the appellant, it is submitted that the two shop rooms in

question did not form part of the assets of the company in liquidation, and that in

any event, the same had been purchased by the appellant from the erstwhile

landlord before the final winding up order

came to be passed on 2nd May, 2003. We may indicate that the said two shop rooms

were said to have been purchased by the appellant on 8 th June, 2001 and 4th March,

2003 respectively.
                                   -2-
       Having heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as the Official

Liquidator, we are of the view that while a final decision is to be taken on the

appellant's application pending before the Company Judge, the appellant may be

allowed to use the two shop rooms for her own use till a final decision is arrived at

regarding the ownership of the same.

              Accordingly, we allow the appeal and direct that necessary directions

be given by the learned Company Judge to the Official Liquidator to allow the

appellant to use the two shop rooms till a final decision is arrived at in the

application filed by the appellant before the Learned Company Judge regarding

the ownership of the shops in question. Such directions must be given within a

month from the date of communication of this order subject to the appellant filing

an undertaking that she will not transfer or encumber the said shop - rooms

during the pendency of Company Appeal No.5 of 2005.


                                                   ....................J.
                                                   (ALTAMAS KABIR)



                                                   ....................J.
                                                   (MARKANDEY KATJU)
NEW DELHI;
August 13, 2008.

