
Supreme Court of India
Vishamber Sunderdas Badlani &amp; Anr vs Indian Bank &amp; Ors on 11 February, 2008Bench: C.K. Thakker, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  D34104 of 2007

PETITIONER:
Vishamber Sunderdas Badlani &amp; Anr

RESPONDENT:
Indian Bank &amp; Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/02/2008

BENCH:
C.K. THAKKER &amp; D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R
								                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
	
	This is a statutory appeal filed by the appellants under provisions of the Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986.  The National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission (for 
short `the Commission') dismissed the complaint filed by the appellants herein inter 
alia observing that disputed questions of fact and law have been involved in the matter 
and that serious allegations have been  made as to fraud, collusion, etc.  It also appears 
from the record of the case that criminal proceedings have been instituted by the 
Central Bureau of Investigation (C.B.I) and investigation has been ordered.  

	The Commission is exercising power of a summary nature.  It is, no doubt, true that it 
is open to the Commission to enter into, deal with and decide questions of fact as well 
as of law.  In an appropriate case, even  evidence can be led.  Normally, however, in 
such cases, if an order is passed on the facts and in the circumstances of the case 
granting liberty to the appellants-complainants to approach a civil Court, it cannot be 
said that by exercising such power, illegality  has been committed by the Commission.

	Hence, the appeal is summarily dismissed.
..2/-

 : 2 :
	It is, however, clarified that as and when an appropriate proceeding will be taken by 
the appellants, any observation made either by the Commission or by us will not come 
in the way of appellants.  If any suit is filed, it is open to the appellants to make 
appropriate prayer on limitation and the Court will keep in mind the facts and 
circumstances of the case and the present proceedings initiated by the appellants.  The 
Court will also consider Section 14 of the Limitation Act, 1963.  

