
Supreme Court of India
Rajendran And Others vs Shankar Sundaram And Others on 30 January, 2008Author: S Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Harjit Singh Bedi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  802 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Rajendran and others

RESPONDENT:
Shankar Sundaram and others

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 30/01/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; HARJIT SINGH BEDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

(Arising out of SLP (C) No. 22880 of 2004)


S.B. SINHA, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.	Appellants herein were defendant Nos. 4 to 7 in the suit.  
Plaintiff-respondent No.1 filed the suit against them and four others. 
They are admittedly partners of defendant No.1 firm, M/s. AR. AS &amp; 
P.V.PV , registered under the Partnership Act, 1932.  Defendant No.3 
P. Shankar (Respondent No.4 herein) was also a partner in the said 
firm.  
3.	Allegedly, Defendant No.2, P.V. Purushothaman (Respondent 
No.3 herein), who has been described as the Managing Partner of the 
said firm, fraudulently obtained an advance from the plaintiff 
wherefor a personal guarantee was furnished by the defendant No.2.  
Indisputably a cheque for a sum of Rs. 50 lakhs was issued in the 
name of the defendant No.1.  

4.	Plaintiff-Respondent filed the aforementioned suit for 
realisation of a sum of Rs.70,30,000/- with interest @ 20% per annum 
inter alia alleging that all the defendants were jointly and severally 
liable therefor.  An application under Order XXXVIII Rule 5 of the 
Code of Civil Procedure was filed by the plaintiff.  

5.	Appellants in their written statement inter alia raised a 
contention that since the amount of Rs. 50 lakhs purported to have 
been taken in advance by defendant No.2 in connivance with 
defendant Nos. 3 &amp; 8 had not been used for the benefit of the 
partnership firm, no order of attachment could be issued as against the 
appellants herein.  The said contention of the appellants was accepted 
by a learned Single Judge of the High Court by his order dated 10th 
December, 2002  opining :-

	The  copy  of  the  partnership  deed  date 
01-4-1996 has been filed by the contesting 
defendants in the typed set.  A perusal of the same 
clearly disclosed that the 2nd Defendant was not a 
partner in the 1st defendant firm.  Moreover, the 
plaintiff had also not filed any record to show that 
the 2nd defendant was already in a partner (sic) in 
the 1st defendant firm and the borrowal was also 
made only for the firm.  Unless and until, it is 
established by the plaintiff, I am of the view that 
the plaintiff is not entitled to seek any interim 
order calling upon the defendants to execute a 
security. 

6.	An intra court appeal was preferred thereagainst wherein a 
Division Bench of the High Court by reason of the impugned 
judgment opined :-

The Learned Judge has not appreciated that the 
3rd Defendant who is the partner of the firm as per 
the partnership deed dated 1-4-1996 executed the 
promissory notes and clause 10 of the partnership 
firm gives power to a partner to borrow monies 
(sic) from the 3rd parties for the purpose of 
business.  The 2nd Defendant gave a letter which is 
only for personal guarantee.  So, the reasonings 
given by the Leaned Judge that since the 2nd 
defendant is not a partner, the borrowal of money 
is not for the benefit of the partnership cannot be 
countenanced.  When the cheque was given in the 
name of the firm by the Plaintiff, prima facie, it 
has to be taken that it is borrowed on behalf of the 
partnership firm.  When the payment of the money 
by the Plaintiff in the firm is not in dispute and in 
the absence of any specific allegation that the 
amount was paid personally to the defendants, 2, 3 
and 8, though the cheque was issued in the name 
of the firma and the Plaintiff also colluded with 
them, the argument of the Learned Counsel 
regarding the alleged collusion cannot be accepted.  
Whether the amount is used for the firm or 
personally by the defendants 2, 3 and 8 can be 
gone into only after adducing evidence.  Prima 
facie, we find that since the amount was paid in the 
name of the firm and promissory notes were 
executed by the partners of the firm and no other 
partnership deed is produced before the Court 
other than that the partnership dated 1-4-1996, the 
learned Judge is not correct in rejecting the 
Application as if the plaintiff has no prima facie 
case.  The learned Judge has not given any other 
finding as to the necessity for attachment, but 
rejected the application only on the ground that the 
2nd defendant is not the partner of the firm.

	
     On the said findings the appeal preferred by the plaintiff-
respondent was allowed.  Appellants are thus before us.

7.	Appellants are, thus, before us.

8.	Mr. Ramamurthy, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellants, would take us through the plaint as well as the written 
statement to contend that from a perusal thereof it would appear that 
in obtaining the said purported loan from the plaintiff-respondent, 
defendant Nos. 2, 3 &amp; 8 played a prime role    As defendant No.2 was 
stated to be the Managing Partner of the firm, which he was not, and 
in fact only his son (defendant No.3) was a partner, the purported loan 
was granted by the plaintiff without even caring to ascertain as to who 
are the partners of the said firm.  

9.	Our attention was furthermore drawn to various provisions of 
the Partnership Act and in particular, Section 2(a); Section 18; Section 
19; Section 22 and Section 28 thereof for advancing the proposition 
that the firm would be bound only when a transaction is entered into 
by a partner of the firm and that too subject to the limitations 
contained in the aforementioned provisions.  

10.	Mr. Amit Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents, on the other hand supported the impugned judgment. 

11.	Concededly, the amount of loan was advanced by a cheque.  
The said cheque was drawn in the name of the partnership firm.  
Concededly again, the appellants were the partners thereof at the 
relevant time, although an endeavour was made before the learned 
Single Judge to show that they ceased to be so.  Having regard to the 
fact that they purported to have retired from the partnership firm in the 
year 2001 and the transaction herein between the parties are of the 
year 2000, prima facie the liability of the appellants could not have 
been ignored. 
12.	The application for attachment before judgment was filed by 
the plaintiff so as to protect his interest in the event the suit is decreed.  
The court exercises, in such a situation, jurisdiction under Order 
XXXVIII Rule 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure.  The Division Bench 
of the High Court merely directed the appellants herein to furnish 
security within the time specified thereunder.  It was directed that only 
on their failure to do so, an order of attachment of the 2nd item on the 
schedule to the petition shall be issued.  

13.	Appellants, in our opinion, are not seriously prejudiced thereby.  
The court while exercising its jurisdiction under Order XXXVIII Rule 
5 of the Code of Civil Procedure is required to form a prima facie 
opinion at that stage.  It need not go into the correctness or otherwise 
of all the contentions raised by the parties.  A cheque had been issued 
in the name of the firm.  The appellants are partners thereof.  A 
pronote had been executed by a partner of the firm.  Thus even under 
the Partnership Act prima facie the plaintiff could enforce his claim 
not only as against the firm but also as against its partners.  
14. 	Sections 2(a) ;  18 ;  19 ; 22 and  28 to which our attention has 
been drawn, instead of assisting the appellants, prima facie assist the 
plaintiff-respondent.   Allegations against defendant Nos. 2, 3 and 8 
are required to be gone into at the hearing of the suit.  The Court at 
this stage is required only to form a prima facie opinion.  The plaintiff 
is entitled to secure his interest keeping in view the amount involved 
in the suit.  For the said purpose a detailed discussion in regard to the 
question as to whether defendant No.2 was a partner or not is not of 
much relevance.  

15.	In any view of the matter as the appellants are not seriously 
prejudiced if they furnish the security, this, in our opinion, is not a fit 
case where this Court should exercise its jurisdiction under Article 
136 of the Constitution of India.  

16.	For the reasons abovementioned this appeal fails and is 
dismissed.  No order as to costs. 

