
Supreme Court of India
Education Officer (Primary), ... vs Mohammed &amp; Ors on 12 February, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, H.S. Bedi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1243 of 2008

PETITIONER:
EDUCATION OFFICER (PRIMARY), OSMANABAD

RESPONDENT:
MOHAMMED &amp; ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 12/02/2008

BENCH:
TARUN CHATTERJEE &amp; H.S. BEDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R

CIVIL APPEAL NO.1243 OF 2008
(@ S.L.P.(C)No.6241/2006)


	Leave granted.
	Heard learned counsel for the parties.
	This appeal is directed against the final judgment and order dated 30th 
September, 2005, passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Bench at 
Aurangabad in Writ Petition No.1188 of 2004.  In the impugned order ultimately the 
Division Bench of the High Court passed the following order:
"In the result, the writ petition is allowed.  The impugned order 
dated 30.9.2002 passed by the Respondent No.2 is quashed and set 
aside.  We direct the Respondent No.4 to absorb the Petitioner as an 
excess employee under Rule 26 of the M.E.P.S. Act in any other 
recognized and aided private school.  The absorption shall be 
granted within a period of three months from today, failing which, 
on expiry of three months, the Education Officer shall start 
releasing salary in favour of the Petitioner."
	We have carefully examined this order of the High Court.  It appears 
from the records that the order of the School Tribunal was an ex-parte order in 
which the present appellant was not a party.  It is also an admitted position that an 
application for recall of that ex-parte order passed by the School Tribunal has 
already been filed at the instance of the  appellant,  which has not yet been decided.  

::2::

If that application is allowed and the order is recalled, there cannot be any dispute 
that the right that has been accrued to the present respondent shall automatically 
come to an end. On the other hand, if the application is rejected the respondent 
would be entitled to all benefits arising out of the said order.
	That  being  the  position,  we  dispose  of  this appeal by directing the 
School Tribunal to decide the said application for recall positively within three 
months from the date of supply of a copy of this order before the School Tribunal, 
without being influenced by any of the observations made by the High Court or any 
observation made by us in this order, and without granting unnecessary 
adjournment to either of the parties.
	The appeal is disposed of accordingly with no order as to costs.

