
Supreme Court of India
Mathania Fabrics vs Commnr. Of Central Excise Jaipur on 4 January, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  5398 of 2002

PETITIONER:
Mathania Fabrics	

RESPONDENT:
Commnr. of Central Excise Jaipur

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 04/01/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

(With Civil Appeal No.1856/2005)


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	These two appeals involve identical questions and are, 
therefore, disposed of by this common judgment.  Appeals are 
directed against the orders passed by the Customs, Excise and 
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, New Delhi (in short the 
CESTAT) and Customs, Excise &amp; Gold Control Appellate 
Tribunal, New Delhi (in short the CEGAT).  The appeals filed 
by the appellants were dismissed by CESTAT holding that they 
were not entitled to benefit of concerned notifications. In case 
of appellant M/s Vimal Textile Mills, the concerned 
Notifications were Notification No.28/94-CE dated 1.3.1994 
the Notification No.8/96-CE dated 23.7.1996 and its 
successor Notifications.  CESTAT denied the benefit relying on 
a larger Benchs decision in the case of M/s Mathania Fabrics 
v. Commissioner of Central Excise, Jaipur [2002 (142) ELT 49 
LB]. Same is the subject matter of challenge in C.A.No.5398 of 
2002. 

2.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

     Appellants are engaged in the processing of cotton fabrics 
falling under Chapter 52. They claimed to be undertaking the 
processes of bleaching, mercerising, dyeing, printing, washing, 
drying and finishing before the fabrics were packed and 
cleared.

     Note 3 to Chapter 52 reads as follows:

     In relation to the manufacture of 
products of Heading Nos. 52.07, 52.08 and 
52.09, bleaching, mercersing, dyeing, printing, 
water proofing, shrink-proofing, organdie 
process or any other process or any one or 
more of these processes shall amount to 
manufacture.
     
     
3.	In Civil Appeal No.1856 of 2005 the stand taken by the 
appellants was that they were not using power in the 
processing of the fabrics and, therefore, the benefit which they 
were earlier availing was available. They had not used any 
power while undertaking the activities of bleaching, 
mercersing, dyeing, printing, washing, drying and finishing 
before the fabrics were packed and cleared. It was further 
submitted that the Notification No.5/99 was amended by 
Notification No.35/99-CE dated 28.8.99 and the same was 
applicable retrospectively and the Explanation below serial 
No.102 of Notification No.5/99 was substituted as under:
	Explanation- For the purposes of this 
exemption, cotton fabrics subjected to any one 
or more of the following processes with the aid 
of power, shall be deemed to have been 
processed without the aid of power or steam, 
namely:-
(a)	lifting to overhead tanks or emptying in 
underground tanks handling of chemicals 
such as acids, chlorine, caustic soda.

4.	It was, therefore, submitted that there was doubt about 
the applicable provisions and, therefore, Section 11A of the 
Central Excise Act, 1944 (in short the Act) was not applicable. 
5.	Stand of the Revenue on the other hand was that the 
amendment to the Notification was not retrospective and in 
effect it substituted the explanation. Reference was also made 
to the Explanation by Notification No.35/99-CE dated 4th 
August, 1999 which reads as follows:
Explanation - For the purpose of this 
exemption, cotton fabrics subjected to any one 
or more of the following processes with the aid 
of power, shall be deemed to have been 
processed without the aid of power or steam 
namely: chemicals for lifting the water and for 
drying the fabrics does not amount to use of 
power in the processing of cotton fabrics.   

6.	CESTAT held that there was nothing in the Notification 
dated 4.8.99 to suggest that the amendment carried out was 
to be given retrospective effect. It was held that factually the 
adjudicating authority had found that power had been used. 

7.	Appellants took the stand that the processes undertaken 
amounted to manufacture but for the deemed definition of 
manufacture as noted above the processes undertaken by the 
appellants would not amount to manufacture.  In respect of 
the above processes undertaken by the appellant and no 
power was used.  Appellants claimed benefit of exemption 
granted to cotton fabrics processed without the aid of power.  
Appellants took the stand that since they had not used the 
power in respect of the above processes, the benefit was  
available.  They submitted that the use of power was only in 
certain ancillary and incidental areas such as mixing of 
chemicals etc. and therefore the benefit could not have been 
denied.  Department denied the benefit on the ground that 
there was use of power and the view was found by the 
tribunal.  In any event it was submitted that when the position 
in law was not clear and the authorities had to issue 
clarification, Section 11A of Act cannot be invoked. Tribunal 
after referring to the definition of manufacture under Section 
2(f) of the Act and the decisions of this Court in J.K. Cotton 
Spg.Wvg. Mills Co. Ltd. v. Sales Tax officer, Kanpur [1997(91) 
ELT 34 SC] and CCE, v. Rajasthan State Chemical Works 
[1991(55) ELT 444 SC] held that the use of power in the 
operation of stirrer and electric motor for lifting water and 
caustic soda would amount to manufacture with the aid of 
power.  In view of the decision of this Court in Rajasthan State 
Chemicals Works case (supra) the stand about the 
applicability of Section 11A was held to be untenable. It held 
that the period involved was subsequent to the decision. 
Strong reliance is placed on a letter of Commissioner of 
Central Excise dated 10.1.1999, to contend that there was 
doubt about the nature of the process involved.  Said letter is 
significant. In view of this Courts decision it is not known 
under what circumstances the letter was written. It is to be 
noted that the penalty amounts were equivalent to the extra 
demand raised but the Tribunal has reduced to it to 
Rs.25,00,000/-. Therefore, the appeal No. 1856 of 2005 is 
clearly without merit and we dismiss it. 

8.	So far as Civil Appeal No. 5398 of 2002 is concerned, the 
period involved is 14.12.1980 to 15.12.1985 when the first 
notice was issued on 9.12.1986. It appears that in the show 
cause notice reply there was no reference to this aspect.  So 
far merit is concerned, the plea was that there is no aid of 
power used. It is to be noted that in paragraph 9 of the order, 
CEGAT observed as follows:
If pumping of brine into salt pans and lifting 
of coke and lime stone to the platform with the 
aid of power can be treated as part of the 
continuous process of manufacture, there is 
no reason to hold otherwise when power is 
used for lifting water and pouring the same in 
the kier and bleaching vessel. It is not the case 
of the assessee that water is not an essential 
ingredient for the process of kiering and 
bleaching. The pouring of water into kier and 
bleaching vessel are steps integrally connected 
with the whole process. We, therefore, hold 
that the appellant is not entitled to claim the 
benefit of Notification No. 173/77 dated 
18.6.77 as amended by Notification No. 
130/82 CE dated 20.4.82 as part of the 
process was being carried out with the use of 
power.
     
9.	Therefore, factually the stand that there was no use of 
power is unsustainable.  Coming to the period of limitation the 
five years period has to be reckoned backward from 8.2.1989 
when the show cause notice was issued.  The Commissioner 
shall work out the liability and the penalty amount has to be 
equivalent to the amount of tax demand.

10.	The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. No costs. 

