
Supreme Court of India
Sunil Kumar &amp; Anr vs Anil Kumar on 8 August, 2008Author: .........................J.
Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Aftab Alam
                                                             NON
                                               REPORTABLE

                   IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                    CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.4943 OF 2008
                   (Arising out of S.L.P.(C) 2648 of 2007)

          Sunil Kumar &amp; Anr.                                 ...
          Appellant(s)

          Versus

          Anil Kumar                                 ..Respondent(s)


                                  ORDER

1.   Leave granted.

          2.    This appeal is directed against the Judgment

               and final order dated 1st of December, 2006

               passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana

               at Chandigarh in CR No. 6420 of 2006, by which

               the High Court had dismissed the Civil Revision

               case in limine.

          3.   The respondent filed an application for ejectment

               of the appellant from the demised premises inter

               alia on the ground of non-payment of rent, sub-

                                                                   1
     letting and bonafide requirement of the demised

     premises before the Rent Controller.

4.   The learned Rent Controller rejected the claim of

     the respondent for eviction on the ground of non-

     payment of the rent, subletting but on the

     ground of bonafide requirement, he had allowed

     the eviction against the appellant.

5.   Feeling aggrieved by the order of the learned Rent

     Controller, the appellant filed an appeal before

     the Appellate Authority, Jallandhar and the

     Appellate Authority, by its Judgment dated 15th

     of November, 2006 dismissed the appeal of the

     appellant.

6.   Against the aforesaid orders of the Appellate

     Authority as well as of the Rent Controller, the

     appellant    filed   a    Civil   Revision   case,       as

     mentioned herein.        By the impugned order, the

     said Revision case was also dismissed on the

     ground that there was no perversity or infirmity

     in the orders of the Tribunals below. Before us

                                                          2
     also, the learned counsel could not satisfy that

     the concurrent findings of fact, as affirmed by the

     High   Court,   were   vitiated    by     infirmity        or

     perversity.


7.   Accordingly, we do not find any ground to

     interfere with such concurrent findings of fact.

     The appeal is thus dismissed.


8.   We direct that the appellant shall be permitted to

     keep the premises in question for a further

     period of nine months from this date subject to

     filing the usual undertaking in this court within

     four weeks from today and on expiry of this

     period, he shall vacate and handover peaceful

     possession of the premises in question to the

     respondent. No order as to costs.




                                       .........................J.
                                       [Tarun Chatterjee]

                                                            3
New Delhi;        ........................J.
August 8, 2008.      [Aftab Alam]




                                      4

