
Supreme Court of India
Abbas Ali Khan &amp; Ors vs Union Of India on 7 July, 2008Author: . ...............
Bench: K.G. Balakrishnan, P. Sathasivam, J.M. Panchal
                                                1

                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                        CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                     CIVIL APPEAL NO.4263 OF 2008
           (@SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL)NO.13292 OF 2006)


ABBAS ALI KHAN &amp; ORS.                    Appellant(s)

               VERSUS

UNION OF INDIA                        Respondent(s)


                                 ORDER

            Leave granted.


2.          About 45 post-graduate students of M.D.(Unani) have filed a

writ petition before the High Court of Delhi contending that the stipend

being given to them was very much low as compared to the stipend given to

the post-graduate students of the modern medicine. It was contended that

the post-graduate students of modern medicine were getting Rs.10,050/-

plus D.P.,D.A.,C.C.A. and H.R.A. whereas the post-graduate students of

Indian system of medicine were being given only Rs.2,800/-. The learned

single Judge was pleased to direct that there should be parity in the matter

of payment of stipend to the post-graduate students of Indian system of

medicine and also the modern system of medicine. Against that the Union

of India has filed an LPA before the High Court and the Division Bench of the

High Court was pleased to set aside the order of the learned single Judge.

Against this, the appellants have come before this Court by way of this

appeal.
                                       2
3.          Heard learned senior counsel for the appellants and also learned

Addl.Solicitor General.


4.          It   may   be   noticed   that   during   the   pendency   of   these

proceedings, the Union of India has considered the matter on the basis of

certain recommendations and the width of disparity between the stipend

payable to the post-graduate students of the Indian system of medicine and

the modern system of medicine was reduced and these facts are stated in

the counter affidavit filed on behalf of Union of India but it was for a period

of five years only and that period has already elapsed in the case of the

appellants and it was decided by the Union of India that this increased

stipend would be payable to the post-graduate students of the Central

Universities and aided medical institutions run by the central government. It

was expressed that the central government was not in a position to

undertake the financial burden of the stipend to students who are pursuing

their post-graduation in the Indian system of medicine whether private or

the state governments managed across the country and it was for the

concerned authorities to find out that stipend is paid for the post-graduate

students of Indian system of medicine.

5.    In the instant case, the students who had filed the writ petition are

students of the years 1992-1996 and we do not think that any orders should

be passed in these proceedings. We make it clear that the authorities may

consider their claim if the same is permissible in terms of their rules or

instructions and proper directions be passed as regards the students who

are presently undergoing the post-graduate courses in the Indian system of
                                  3

medicine.   We find no reason to interfere with the impugned order.

Accordingly, the appeal is disposed of.   No costs.    We leave open the

question raised in this appeal to be considered by the appropriate

authorities as mentioned above.


                                                              ...............CJI.
                                                      (K.G. BALAKRISHNAN)



                                                            .................J.
                                                (P. SATHASIVAM)



                                                            .................J.
                                                (J.M. PANCHAL)

NEW DELHI;
7TH JULY, 2008.

