
Supreme Court of India
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad &amp; Anr vs Rajendra Kumar Aggarwal &amp; Ors on 22 February, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Harjit Singh Bedi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1604 of 2008

PETITIONER:
U.P. Avas Evam Vikas Parishad &amp; Anr

RESPONDENT:
Rajendra Kumar Aggarwal &amp; Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/02/2008

BENCH:
Tarun Chatterjee &amp; Harjit Singh Bedi

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

CIVIL APPEAL NO 1604 OF 2008
(Arising our of SLP (C) No. 3097 of 2008)

					O R D E R
1.	Leave granted.
2.	This appeal by special leave is directed against an interim order 
passed by the High Court of Judicature, Allahabad at Lucknow in a 
writ petition by which the respondents have challenged the 
constitutional validity of the provisions of Article 16 (4-A) of the 
Constitution of India and Rule 8(A) of the UP Government Servants 
Seniority  (Third Amendment) Rules 2007. The High Court, while 
granting the interim order, quoted herein below, has observed that 
since in a bunch of writ petitions, the question regarding the 
constitutional validity of the provisions of Article 16 (4-A) of the 
Constitution of India and Rule 8(A) of the UP Government Servants 
Seniority  (Third Amendment) Rules 2007 is already under challenge 
and the interim order, quoted herein below, has already been passed in 
those bunch of writ petitions, similar interim order shall also be 
passed in the present writ application. 
3.	The interim order granted by the High Court runs as under: -
"In the meantime, as an interim measure, we 
provide that the seniority of the petitioners as 
existing prior to the enforcement of the U.P. 
Government Servants Seniority (Third 
Amendment) Rules, 2007, shall not be disturbed 
in pursuance of the Rules."

4.	Mr. Trivedi, the learned senior counsel appearing for the 
appellants has drawn our attention to the fact that since the 
constitutional validity of Article 16(4-A) has already been upheld in 
M. Nagaraj Vs. Union of India [(2006) 8 SCC 212], the writ 
application itself could not be entertained and in that view of the 
matter, the question of granting the interim order shall not arise at all.
5.	Mr. P.P. Rao, the learned senior counsel appearing for the 
respondents, however, has drawn our attention to an interim order 
passed in a pending writ petition in which the constitutional validity 
of Article 16 (4-A) of the Constitution of India and Rule 8(A) of the 
UP Government Servants Seniority  (Third Amendment) Rules 2007 
has been challenged and submitted that the decision of this court in M. 
Nagaraj Vs. Union of India [supra] has already been considered by 
another division bench of the High Court after explaining the said 
decision and the interim order in the manner indicated above has been 
continued. Therefore, Mr. Rao submitted that instead of interfering 
with the interim order passed by the Division Bench of the High 
Court, direction may be given to the High Court to dispose of the 
pending writ application at an early date preferably within 3 months 
from this date.
6.	Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and after going 
through the decision of this court in M. Nagaraj Vs. Union of India 
[supra] in which the constitutional validity of the provisions of Article 
16 (4-A) of the Constitution of India and Rule 8(A) of the UP 
Government Servants Seniority  (Third Amendment) Rules 2007 has 
already been upheld, we are unable to agree with Mr. P.P. Rao that at 
the interim stage, there was any occasion for the High Court to grant 
the interim order in this pending writ application. In any view of the 
matter, in our view, it was not a fit case for grant of the interim order. 
It is true that another Division Bench of the High Court, after 
considering the decision of this court in M. Nagaraj Vs. Union of 
India [supra], has granted the interim order but we feel that since the 
grant of interim order is discretionary in nature and therefore, only 
because an interim order has been passed by another coordinate bench 
of the High Court, it cannot be said that the interim order should also 
be passed in this pending writ application when the constitutional 
validity of Article 16 (4-A) of the Constitution of India and Rule 8(A) 
of the UP Government Servants Seniority  (Third Amendment) 
Rules 2007 has already been upheld. 
7.	For the reasons aforesaid, we set aside the interim order, as 
quoted hereinabove, and request the High Court to dispose of the 
pending writ application at an early date preferably within 2 months 
from the date of communication of this order to the High Court. The 
appeal is allowed to the extent indicated above. There will be no order 
as to costs. 

