
Supreme Court of India
Pankaj Karmakar &amp; Ors vs Bengal Ambuja Housing Dev. Ltd. &amp; ... on 15 February, 2008Bench: H.K. Sema, Markandey Katju
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1341-1342 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Pankaj Karmakar &amp; Ors.

RESPONDENT:
Bengal Ambuja Housing Dev. Ltd. &amp; Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/02/2008

BENCH:
H.K. SEMA &amp; MARKANDEY KATJU

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
                             
O R D E R
(Arising out of SLP(C) NOS. 16894-16895/2007)								                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
	Leave granted.

	Although lengthy arguments have been advanced before us, in our view, the whole 
controversy is confined to the question as to whether the election is to be held from 
amongst members of eight towers  or including members of the 9th  tower.  We are not 
inclined to go into the merits of the matter.  In the orders of the High Court dated 20th 
February, 2007 and 30th April, 2007, it is clearly held that the election was to be 
conducted from amongst the  members of   eight towers.  So far as the 9th tower is 
concerned, it has been expressly held by the High Court that the legality of the 
construction of the 9th tower is subjudice before a civil Court.  In our view, therefore, 
members of the 9th tower  are not entitled to participate in the election till the trial 
Court decide the issues.
..2/-

 : 2 :
	We, accordingly, dispose of these appeals by directing the Special Officer to conduct 
the elections  from amongst members of the eight towers.  It is clarified that only the  
members of the eight towers shall participate in the election.  We direct the Special 
Officer to conduct the elections peremptorily within a period of three months from 
today.
	To the aforesaid extent, the Orders of the High Court are set aside.  The appeals are 
disposed off.  In view of the order passed above, the contempt proceedings are closed.

