
Supreme Court of India
Ashoka Kumar Thakur vs Union Of India &amp; Others on 10 April, 2008Author: D Bhandari
Bench: Dalveer Bhandari
           CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil)  265 of 2006

PETITIONER:
Ashoka Kumar Thakur

RESPONDENT:
Union of India &amp; Others

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 10/04/2008

BENCH:
Dalveer Bhandari

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.265 OF 2006
WITH
Writ Petition (Civil) Nos.269 AND 598 of 2006, Writ 
Petition (Civil) Nos.29, 35, 53, 336, 313, 335, 231,  
425, 428 of 2007 AND Contempt Petition (C) No.112 of 
2007 in Writ Petition (C) No.265 of 2006.    
* * * * * 


Dalveer Bhandari, J.

1.	The 93rd Amendment to the Constitution directly or 
indirectly affects millions of citizens of this country.  It has been 
challenged in a number of writ petitions.  This Court heard these 
petitions intermittently over the course of several months.  
Appearing on behalf of petitioners and respondents, the 
country's finest legal minds assisted us. 
2.	The fundamental question that arises in these writ petitions 
is:  Whether Article 15(5), inserted by the 93rd Amendment, is 
consistent with the other provisions of the Constitution or 
whether its impact runs contrary to the Constitutional aim of 
achieving a casteless and classless society? 

3.	On behalf of the petitioners, Senior Advocate Mr. F.S. 
Nariman, eloquently argued that if Article 15(5) is permitted to 
remain in force, then, instead of achieving the goal of a casteless 
and classless society, India would be converted into a caste-
ridden society.  The country would forever remain divided on 
caste lines. The Government has sought to repudiate this 
argument.  Petitioners' argument, however, echoes the grave 
concern of our Constitution's original Framers. 

4.	On careful analysis of the Constituent Assembly and the 
Parliamentary Debates, one thing is crystal clear:  our leaders 
have always and unanimously proclaimed with one voice that 
our constitutional goal is to establish a casteless and classless 
society.  Mahatma Gandhi said: "The caste system as we know is 
an anachronism.  It must go if both Hinduism and India are to 
live and grow from day to day."    The first Prime Minister, Pt. 
Jawahar Lal Nehru, said that "no one should be left in any doubt 
that the future Indian Society was to be casteless and classless".  
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar called caste "anti-national".

5.	After almost four decades of independence, while 
participating in the Parliamentary Debate on the Mandal issue, 
then Prime Minister Shri Rajiv Gandhi on 6th September, 1990 
again reiterated the same sentiments: "I think, nobody in this 
House will say that the removal of casteism is not part of the 
national goal, therefore, it would be in the larger interest of the 
nation to get rid of the castes as early as possible".  It is our 
bounden duty and obligation to examine the validity of the 93rd 
Amendment in the background of the Preamble and the ultimate 
goal that runs through the pages of the Constitution.  

6.	To attain an egalitarian society, we have to urgently remove 
socio-economic inequalities.  All learned counsel for the 
petitioners asserted that we must deliver the benefits of 
reservation to only those who really deserve it.  This can only be 
done if we remove the creamy layer. Learned counsel for the 
Union of India and other respondents opposed this assertion. 
The principle of creamy layer emanates from the broad doctrine 
of equality itself. Unless the creamy layer is removed from 
admissions and service reservation, the benefits would not reach 
the group in whose name the impugned legislation was passed  
the poorest of the poor.  Therefore, including the creamy layer 
would be inherently unjust. 

7.	Creamy layer exclusion, however, is just one of the many 
issues raised by the parties.  I need to examine various facets of 
this case in order to decide the validity of the 93rd Amendment 
and the Central Educational Institutions (Reservation in 
Admission) Bill, 2006 (passed as Act 5 of 2007) (hereinafter 
called the "Reservation Act").  I shall focus my analysis on the 
following issues:
1A.  Whether the creamy layer be excluded from 
the 93rd Amendment (Reservation Act)?

1B. What are the parameters for creamy layer 
exclusion?

1C. Is creamy layer exclusion applicable to SC/ST?  

2.   Can the Fundamental Right under Article 21A 
be accomplished without great emphasis on 
primary education? 

3.	Does the 93rd Amendment violate the Basic 
Structure of the Constitution by imposing 
reservation on unaided institutions?

4.	Whether the use of caste to identify SEBCs 
runs afoul of the casteless/classless society, 
in violation of Secularism. 

5.	Are Articles 15(4) and 15(5) mutually 
contradictory, such that 15(5) is 
unconstitutional?

6.	Does Article 15(5)'s exemption of minority 
institutions from the purview of reservation 
violate Article 14 of the Constitution?

7.  	Are the standards of review laid down by the 
U.S. Supreme Court applicable to our review 
of affirmative action under Art 15(5) and 
similar provisions?

8. 	With respect to OBC identification, was the 
Reservation Act's delegation of power to the 
Union Government excessive? 

9. 	Is the impugned legislation invalid as it fails 
to set a time-limit for caste-based 
reservation?

10. At what point is a student no longer 
Educationally Backward and thus no longer 
eligible for special provisions under 15(5)? 

11.	Would it be reasonable to balance OBC 
reservation with societal interests by 
instituting OBC cut-off marks that are slightly 
lower than that of the general category? 
8.	I have carefully examined the pleadings and written 
submissions submitted at length.  Admittedly, the provisions of 
the Constitution and the Preamble lead to the irresistible 
conclusion that the Nation has always wanted to achieve a 
casteless and classless society.  If we permit this impugned 
legislation to be implemented, I am afraid, instead of a casteless 
and classless India, we would be left with a caste-ridden society. 

9.	The first place where caste can be eradicated is the 
classroom.  It all starts with education.  In other words, if you 
belong to a lower caste but are well qualified, hardly anyone 
would care about your caste.  Free and compulsory education is 
now a fundamental right under Article 21A.  The State is duty 
bound to implement this Article on a priority basis.  There has 
been grave laxity in its implementation.  This laxity adversely 
affects almost every walk of life.  In my opinion, nothing is more 
important for the Union of India than to implement this critical 
Article.  

10.	I direct the Union of India to set a time-limit within which 
this Article is going to be completely implemented.  This time-
limit must be set within six months.  In case the Union of India 
fails to fix the time-limit, then perhaps this work will also have to 
be done by the Court.  

11.	The Union of India should appreciate in proper prospective 
that the root cause of social and educational backwardness is 
poverty.  All efforts have to be made to eradicate this 
fundamental problem.  Unless the creamy layer is removed, the 
benefit would not reach those who are in need.  Reservation 
sends the wrong message.  Everybody is keen to get the benefit of 
backward class status.  If we want to really help the socially, 
educationally and economically backward classes, we  need  to  
earnestly  focus  on implementing Article 21A.  We must provide 
educational opportunity from day one. Only then will the 
casteless/classless society be within our grasp.  Once children 
are of college-going age, it is too late for reservation to have much 
of an effect.  The problem with the Reservation Act is that most 
of the beneficiaries will belong to the creamy layer, a group for 
which no benefits are necessary.  Only non-creamy layer OBCs 
can avail of reservations in college admissions, and once they 
graduate from college they should no longer be eligible for post-
graduate reservation.  27% is the upper limit for OBC 
reservation.  The Government need not always provide the 
maximum limit.  Reasonable cut off marks should be set so that 
standards of excellence greatly effect.  The unfilled seats should 
revert to the general category. 

12.	These issues first arise out of the text of the impugned 
Amendment. Reservation for Socially and Educationally 
Backward Classes of Citizens (SEBCs) was introduced by the 93rd 
Amendment.  Article 15(5) states:
"Nothing in this article or in sub-clause (g) of clause 
(1) of article 19 shall prevent the State from making 
any special provision, by law, for the advancement of 
any socially and educationally backward classes of 
citizens or for the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled 
Tribes in so far as such special provisions relate to 
their admission to educational institutions including 
private educational institutions, whether aided or 
unaided by the State, other than minority educational 
institutions referred to in clause (1) of article 30."

?	Excluding the Creamy Layer from receiving 
special benefits:

13.	Affirmative action is employed to eliminate substantive 
social and economic inequality by providing opportunities to 
those who may not otherwise gain admission or employment. 
Articles 14, 15 and 16 allow for affirmative action.  To promote 
Article 14 egalitarian equality, the State may classify citizens into 
groups, giving preferential treatment to one over another. When 
it classifies, the State must keep those who are unequal out of 
the same batch to achieve constitutional goal of egalitarian 
society.

?	Arguments of the Union of India in regard to the 
creamy layer: 

14.	Mr. G.E. Vahanvati, learned Solicitor General and Mr K. 
Parasaran, Senior Advocate appearing for the Government 
contend that creamy layer exclusion is a bad policy.  They argue 
that if you exclude the creamy layer, there would be a shortage of 
candidates who can afford to pay for higher education. This 
argument harms rather than helps the Government.  It cannot 
be seriously disputed that most of the college-going OBCs belong 
to the creamy layer for whom reservations are unnecessary; they 
have the money to attend good schools, tuitions and coaching 
courses for entrance exams.  Naturally, these advantages result 
in higher test scores vis-`-vis the non-creamy layer OBCs.  The 
result is that creamy OBCs would fill the bulk of the OBC quota, 
leaving the non-creamy no better off than before. If the creamy 
get most of the benefit, why have reservations in the first place?  
Learned Senior Counsel for petitioners, Mr. Harish Salve, is 
justified in arguing that before carrying out Constitutional 
Amendments the Union of India must clearly target its 
beneficiaries.  He rightly submitted that we should not make law 
first and thereafter target the law's beneficiaries.  Failure to 
exclude the creamy layer is but one example of this problem.

15.	The Government further submitted that the creamy layer 
should be included to ensure that enough qualified candidates 
fill 27% of the seats reserved to OBCs.  The Oversight Committee 
disagreed.  The Committee relied on data from Karnataka to 
disprove the contention that seats go unfilled when the creamy is 
excluded:  " the apprehension that seats will not be filled up if 
the creamy layer is excluded has been comprehensively shown to 
be unfounded."  [See: Oversight Committee, Vol. 1, Sept. 2006, p. 
69, para 1.7.]  We shall later review the Oversight Committee 
opinion in greater detail.   

?	The reasons for which the creamy layer should 
be excluded:

16.	At the outset, I note that the Parliament rejected the Hindi 
version of the Reservation Act.  The Hindi version of the 
Reservation Act would have expressly excluded the creamy layer. 
[See: Prof. Rasa Singh Rawat's comments in the Parliamentary 
Debate on the Reservation Act, 14 December 2006]  

17.	The Parliament eventually passed the English version in 
which the creamy layer is not mentioned, making its intention 
clear.  It wanted to include the creamy layer. For all practical 
purposes, it did so.  Therefore, I will treat it as included.  
Counsel for the Union of India argued that it is still theoretically 
possible for the executive to exclude the creamy layer.  Much is 
possible in theory.  Given the executive's failure to take action 
since the time the Act was passed, I find this argument 
unavailing.  

18.	With the Parliament's intention in view, I will deal in some 
detail with the reasons as to why the creamy layer should be 
excluded from reservation.  I do so because I want to emphasize 
that the creamy layer must never be included in any affirmative 
action legislation.  It also becomes imperative to gather the 
original Framers' and the Framers' intention.  At the outset, we 
recognise a distinction between the original Framers and the 
Framers, i.e., Members of the First Parliament.  Members of the 
Constituent Assembly and the First Parliament were one in the 
same.  But the distinction is necessary to the extent that the 
First Parliament deviated from its constitutional philosophy.  By 
examining the debate on Article 15(4), I may ascertain whether 
the Framers wanted to exclude the creamy layer.  

19.	The First Parliament believed that "economic" was included 
in the "social" portion of "socially and educationally backward."  
Prime Minister Nehru said as much:  
"One of the main amendments or ideas put forward is 
in regard to the addition of the word "economical".  
Frankly, the argument put forward, with slight 
variation, I would accept, but my difficult is this that 
when we chose those particular words there, "for the 
advancement of any socially and educationally 
backward classes", we chose them because they occur 
in article 340 and we wanted to bring them bodily 
from there. Otherwise I would have had not the 
slightest objection to add "economically".  But if I 
added "economically" I would at the same time not 
make it a kind of cumulative thing but would say that 
a person who is lacking in any of these things should 
be helped. "Socially" is a much wider word including 
many things and certainly including economically.  
Therefore, I felt that "socially and educationally" really 
cover the ground and at the same time you bring out a 
phrase used in another part of the Constitution in a 
slightly similar context." (See: the Parliamentary 
Debates on First Amendment Bill, 1 June 1951, p. 
9830.)  

Had it not been for a desire to achieve symmetry in drafting, 
"economically" would have been included.  Had this been done, 
the creamy layer would have been excluded ab initio.

20.	In the 15(4) debate, Shri M.A. Ayyangar's wanted to add 
"economic" to ensure that the rich SEBCs would not receive 
special provisions.  
"I thought "economic" might be added so that rich 
men may not take advantage of this provision.  In my 
part of the country there are the Nattukkottai 
Chettiars who do not care to have English education, 
but they are the richest of the lot  should there be 
special reservation for them?"  (See: The Parliamentary 
Debates on First Amendment Bill, 1 June 1951, p. 
9817.)  
(emphasis added). 

This hesitation aside, Shri M.A. Ayyangar was satisfied that the 
term "economic" was included in the term "social."  The Framers 
were worried about creamy layer inclusion, albeit under a 
different name.  They wanted to ensure that the "richest of the 
[backward] lot" would not benefit from special provisions.  With 
their sentiment on our side, we are even more confident that we 
should strike out in the direction that strikes down laws that 
include the creamy layer. 

?	Including the creamy layer means unequals are 
treated as equals in violation of the right to 
equality under Articles 14, 15 and 16.

21.	In the present case, Dr. Rajeev Dhavan, the learned Senior 
Counsel and Mr. S.K. Jain, the learned counsel vehemently 
argued on behalf of petitioners that it is precisely because 
equality is at issue that the creamy layer must be removed.  The 
creamy layer has been the subject matter of a number of 
celebrated judgments of this Court.  In a seven Judge Bench in 
State of Kerala &amp; Another v. N. M. Thomas &amp; Others (1976) 
2 SCC 310, Justice Mathew, in his concurring judgment, dealt 
with the right to equality in the following words: 
"66. The guarantee of equality before the law or the 
equal opportunity in matters of employment is a 
guarantee of something more than what is required by 
formal equality. It implies differential treatment of 
persons who are unequal. Egalitarian principle has 
therefore enhanced the growing belief that 
Government has an affirmative duty to eliminate 
inequalities and to provide opportunities for the 
exercise of human rights and claims. "
(emphasis added)


22.	In Indra Sawhney &amp; Others v. Union of India &amp; Others 
(1992) Supp (3) SCC 217, (hereinafter referred to as Sawhney I), 
this Court has aptly observed that reservation is given to 
backward classes until they cease to be backward, and not 
indefinitely.  This Court in para 520 (Sawant, J.) has stated as 
under:
"Society does not remain static. The 
industrialisation and the urbanisation which 
necessarily followed in its wake, the advance on 
political, social and economic fronts made particularly 
after the commencement of the Constitution, the 
social reform movements of the last several decades, 
the spread of education and the advantages of the 
special provisions including reservations secured so 
far, have all undoubtedly seen at least some 
individuals and families in the backward classes, 
however small in number, gaining sufficient means to 
develop their capacities to compete with others in 
every field. That is an undeniable fact. Legally, 
therefore, they are not entitled to be any longer called 
as part of the backward classes whatever their original 
birthmark. It can further hardly be argued that once a 
backward class, always a backward class. That would 
defeat the very purpose of the special provisions made 
in the Constitution for the advancement of the 
backward classes, and for enabling them to come to 
the level of and to compete with the forward classes, 
as equal citizens."
(emphasis supplied).  

23.	For our purposes, creamy layer OBCs and non-creamy layer 
OBCs are not equals when it comes to moving up the socio-
economic ladder by means of educational opportunity.  Failing to 
remove the creamy layer treats creamy layer OBCs and non-
creamy layer OBCs as equals. In the same paragraph, Justice 
Sawant stated that " to rank [the creamy layer] with the rest of 
the backward classes would  amount to treating the unequals 
equally..." violating the equality provisions of the Constitution. 

24.	According to the Kerala Legislature, there was no creamy 
layer in Kerala.  The legislation was challenged in Indra 
Sawhney v. Union of India &amp; Others (2000) 1 SCC 168, 
(hereinafter referred to as Sawhney II).  The Court struck the 
two provisions that barred creamy layer exclusion, concluding 
that non-inclusion of the creamy-layer and inclusion of forward 
castes in reservation violates the right to equality under Article 
14 and the basic structure.  

25.	In Sawhney II at para 65, the Court had gone to the extent 
of observing that not even the Parliament, by constitutional 
amendment, could dismantle the basic structure by including the 
creamy layer in reservation:  
"What we mean to say is that the Parliament and the 
legislature in this country cannot transgress the basic 
feature of the Constitution, namely, the principle of 
equality enshrined in Article 14 of which Article 16(1) 
is a facet. Whether the creamy layer is not excluded or 
whether forward castes get included in the list of 
backward classes, the position will be the same, 
namely, that there will be a breach not only of Article 
14 but of the basic structure of the Constitution. The 
non-exclusion of the creamy layer or the inclusion of 
forward castes in the list of backward classes will, 
therefore, be totally illegal. Such an illegality offending 
the root of the Constitution of India cannot be allowed 
to be perpetuated even by constitutional amendment."

26.	By definition, the creamy and non-creamy are unequal 
when it comes to schooling.  Relative to their non-creamy 
counterparts, the creamy have a distinct advantage in gaining 
admission.  While the creamy and non-creamy are given equal 
opportunity to gain admission in the reserved category, this 
equality exists in name only.  Will the OBC daughter of a 
Minister, IAS officer or affluent business owner attend better 
schools than her non-creamy counterpart?  Yes.  Will she go to 
private tuitions unaffordable to her non-creamy counterpart?  
Certainly.  And where will she cram for the all-decisive entrance 
exams?  In a coaching center?  Of course.  Will she come home 
from school to find a family member waiting?  Probably.  And 
when she seeks help from her parents, are they educated and 
able to give superior assistance with schoolwork?  Most likely. 

27.	I take judicial notice of these anecdotes, for they flesh out a 
simple fact:  she has all the resources that her non-creamy 
counterpart lacks.  It is no surprise that she will outperform the 
non-creamy.  On average, her lot will take the reserved seats.  

28.	I cannot consider the OBC Minister's daughter and the non-
creamy OBC as equals in terms of their chances at earning a 
university seat; nor can I allow them to be treated equally. To 
lump them in the same category is an unreasonable 
classification. Putting them in head-to-head competition for the 
same seats violates the right to equality in Articles 14, 15 and 
16. 

29.	In its conclusion at para 122, M. Nagaraj &amp; Others v. 
Union of India &amp; Others (2006) 8 SCC 212, a Constitution 
Bench of this Court while dealing with Article 16(4A) and 16(4B) 
with regard to SC and ST observed as under:-
"We reiterate that the ceiling limit of 50%, the concept 
of creamy layer and the compelling reasons, namely, 
backwardness, inadequacy of representation and 
overall administrative efficiency are all constitutional 
requirements without which the structure of equality 
of opportunity in Article 16 would collapse."

It was contended that Nagraj is obiter in regard to creamy layer 
exclusion. According to Nagraj, reservation in promotion for 
SC/ST is contingent on exclusion of the creamy layer.  (paras 
122, 123 and 124).  The contention of the Union of India cannot 
be accepted.  The discussion regarding creamy layer is far from 
obiter in Nagraj.  If the State fails to exclude the SC/ST creamy 
layer, the reservation must fall.  Placing this contingency in the 
conclusion makes the discussion of creamy layer part of the 
ratio.

30.	In sum, creamy layer inclusion violates the right to equality.  
That is, non-exclusion of creamy layer and inclusion of forward 
castes in reservation violates the right to equality in Articles 14, 
15 and 16 as well as the basic structure of the Constitution.

?	If you belong to the creamy layer, you are not  
SEBC. 

31.	One of the prominent questions raised in the writ petitions 
is whether creamy layer OBCs should be considered socially and 
educationally backward under the provisions of Article 15(5).  
While interpreting this provision, a basic syllogism must govern 
our decision.  If you belong to the creamy layer, you are socially 
advanced and cannot be given the benefit of reservation.  (See: 
Sawhney I). 

32.	Once one is socially advanced, he cannot be socially and 
educationally backward.  He who is socially forward is likely to 
be educationally forward as well. If either condition (social or 
educational) goes unmet, one cannot qualify for the benefit of 
reservation as SEBC.  Being socially advanced, the creamy layer 
is not socially backward pursuant to Articles 15(4) and 15(5) of 
the Constitution.  

33.	Even the text of Articles 15(4) and 15(5) provides for creamy 
layer exclusion. In this sense, one could say that the term 
"creamy layer" is synonymous with "non-SEBC". 

34.	Similar interpretation is given to "backward classes" under 
Article 16(4).  The Parliament could not reasonably make 
reservation for non-backwards. Such a Bill on the face of it 
would violate the Constitution. In Sawhney I, the Government of 
India issued an O.M. on 13 August 1990, reserving 27% of 
Government posts to SEBCs.  Writing for the majority, at para 
792 of page 724, Justice Reddy explained that the creamy layer 
was not SEBC. 
"The very concept of a class denotes a number of 
persons having certain common traits which 
distinguish them from the others. In a backward class 
under Clause (4) of Article 16, if the connecting link is 
the social backwardness, it should broadly be the 
same in a given class. If some of the members are far 
too advanced socially (which in the context, 
necessarily means economically and, may also mean 
educationally) the connecting thread between them 
and the remaining class snaps. They would be misfits 
in the class. After excluding them alone, would the 
class be a compact class. In fact, such exclusion 
benefits the truly backward"  

Even though the O.M. was silent on the issue of creamy layer, 
Justice Reddy excluded the creamy layer at para 859(3)(d).  The 
O.M. could not go into effect until the creamy layer was 
excluded. [para 861(b)].   Exclusion was only in regard to OBC; 
SC/ST were not touched. (para 792).  In Sawhney I, the entire 
discussion was confined only to Other Backward Classes.  
Similarly, in the instant case, the entire discussion was confined 
only to Other Backward Classes.  Therefore, I express no opinion 
with regard to the applicability of exclusion of creamy layer to the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. 

?	Creamy Layer OBCs are not educationally 
backward

35.	In addition to social backwardness, the text of 15(5) 
demands that recipients are also educationally backward.  Even 
though the creamy layer's status as socially advanced is 
sufficient to disqualify them for preferential treatment, the 
creamy layer from any community is usually educated and will 
want the same for its children.  They know that education is the 
key to success. For most, it made them. People belonging to this 
group do not require reservation.

7 	Creamy Layer Inclusion Robs the Poor and Gives 
to the Rich:

36.	In a number of judgments, the view has been taken that the 
creamy layer's inclusion takes from the poor and gives to the 
rich.  

37.	Our Courts in following cases had taken the same view. 
[See: N.M Thomas (supra), para 124 (seven-Judge Bench); K.C. 
Vasanth Kumar &amp; Another v. State of Karnataka, 1985 
(Supp) SCC 714, paras 2, 24 and 28 (five-Judge Bench); 
Sawhney I., paras 520, 793 and 859(3)(d) (nine-Judge Bench); 
Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. State of Bihar &amp; Others (1995) 5 
SCC 403, paras 3, 17 and 18 (two-Judge Bench); Sawhney II, 
paras 8-10, 27, 48 and 65-66 (three-Judge Bench); Nagaraj 
(supra), paras, 120-124 (five-Judge Bench); Nair Service 
Society v. State of Kerala, (2007) 4 SCC 1; paras 31 and 49-54 
(two-Judge Bench)]. 

38.	In Akhil Bharatiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) 
v. Union of India &amp; Others (1981) 1 SCC 246, Justice Iyer had 
this to say about the creamy layer:  
 "92.  Maybe, some of the forward lines of the 
backward classes have the best of both the worlds and 
their electoral muscle qua caste scares away even 
radical parties from talking secularism to them. We 
are not concerned with that dubious brand. In the 
long run, the recipe for backwardness is not creating a 
vested interest in backward castes but liquidation of 
handicaps, social and economic, by constructive 
projects. All this is in another street and we need not 
walk that way now.

94.  Nor does the specious plea that because a few 
harijans are better off, therefore, the bulk at the 
bottom deserves no jack-up provisions merit scrutiny. 
A swallow does not make a summer. Maybe, the State 
may, when social conditions warrant, justifiably 
restrict harijan benefits to the harijans among the 
harijans and forbid the higher harijans from robbing 
the lowlier brethren."

39.	Creamy layer inclusion was not enough to strike an entire 
provision in this case. He suggests that creamy layer exclusion is 
an issue to be dealt with at a later time.  
"98.	The argument that there are rich and influential 
harijans who rob all the privileges leaving the serf-level 
sufferers as suppressed as ever. The Administration 
may well innovate and classify to weed out the creamy 
layer of SCs/STs but the court cannot force the State 
in that behalf."

Thus, Justice Iyer does not mandate creamy layer exclusion; 
rather, he leaves the question to the State. 

40.	Apart from judicial pronouncements, the Oversight 
Committee suggested that failure to exclude the creamy layer 
would lead to unfair results. The Committee was cautious to 
reach a conclusion. 

41.	In its Report, it stated that " the decision taken was to 
leave the matter to the Government of India, keeping in mind the 
fact that the 'creamy layer' is not covered in the Reservation Act, 
2006." (See: Oversight Committee, Vol. 1, p. 33 and 4.2.) 

42.	Before "leaving" the matter to the Government, the 
Committee nevertheless made its recommendation:  "In case it is 
decided not to exclude the 'creamy layer', the poorest among the 
OBCs will be placed at a disadvantage."  (emphasis added). (See: 
Oversight Committee at Appendix I in its Report at p. 70, para 
1.13).  At page 69 of Vol. I of its Report, the Committee offered 
data to support this conclusion:
"1.6:  Appendix-2 examines in detail the status of the 
socio-economic development of OBCs in respect of 
such parameters as relate to poverty, health, 
education, unemployment, workforce participation, 
land ownership etc.  The analysis of the NSS data 
clearly brings out that inclusion of the creamy layer 
will result in reserved seats getting pre-empted by the 
OBCs from the top two deciles at the cost of the poorer 
income deciles of the OBCs.  Thus almost all rural 
OBCs as well as Urban OBCs from the Northern, 
Central and Eastern regions of India will be deprived 
of the intended benefits of reservation. 
                                                                                     [emphasis added]

1.7: On the other hand, it was argued that if the 
creamy layer of OBCs is denied access to reservation 
in education pari-passau with the principle applied in 
the case of employment, the reserved seats may not 
get filled up, again defeating the purpose of bringing in 
reservation for the OBCs.  In a case study from 
Karnataka (included in Annexure X), it has been 
clearly shown that the OBC quotas have been utilized 
without any compromise with academic excellence in a 
situation where the creamy layer has been excluded.  
The apprehension that seats will not be filled up if the 
creamy layer is excluded has been comprehensively 
shown to be unfounded.  The case study shows that 
the performance of students from below the creamy 
layer is outstanding and much better than general 
category students."  

43.	The Committee could have played it safe.  Despite some 
opposition, the Committee included its opinion on the matter.  
And that opinion is unequivocal:  the creamy must be excluded.   

44.	What is allegedly for the poor goes to the rich.  Is that 
reasonable? Trumpeted by the Parliament as a "boost to the 
morale of the downtrodden"  and " in the right direction of 
ensuring social justice to other backward classes "  and 
"ensuring social justice to those weaker sections ", Article 15(5) 
dupes those who actually need preferential treatment. (See: Prof. 
Basudeb Barman, M.P., the Parliamentary Debates, p. 531, 
December 21, 2005; Prof. M. Ramadass, M.P., at p. 510; and 
Shri C.K. Chandrappan, M.P., at p. 494 respectively).  For the 
poorest of the poor, reservation in college is an empty promise. 
Few of the financially poor OBCs attend high school, let alone 
college. Instead of rewarding those that complete Plus 2, the 93rd 
Amendment (Art 15(5)) poses another barrier:  they will have to 
compete with the creamy layer for reserved seats. 

45.	As explained, the poor lack the resources to compete with 
the creamy, who "snatch away" those seats. {N. M. Thomas 
(supra), para 124 (Iyer, J.)}.  With the creamy excluded, poor 
OBCs would compete with poor OBCs  the playing field levelled.  
As it stands, the Amendment and Act serve one purpose:  they 
provide a windfall of seats to the rich and powerful amongst the 
OBCs.  It is unreasonable to classify rich and poor OBCs as a 
single entity. As noted, this violates the Article 14 right to 
equality.  

46.	Unless the creamy layer is removed, OBCs cannot exercise 
their group rights.  The Union of India and other respondents 
argued that creamy layer exclusion is wrong because the text of 
the 93rd Amendment bestows a benefit on "classes", not 
individuals.  While it is a group right, the group must contain 
only those individuals that belong to the group. I first take the 
entire lot of creamy and non creamy layer OBCs. I then remove 
the creamy layer on an individual basis based on their income, 
property holdings, occupation, etc.  What is left is a group that 
meets constitutional muster. It is a group right that must also 
belong to individuals, if the right is to have any meaning.   If one 
OBC candidate is denied special provisions that he should have 
received by law, it is not the group's responsibility to bring a 
claim.  He would be the one to do so.  He has a right of action to 
challenge the ruling that excluded him from the special 
provisions afforded to OBCs.  In this sense, he has an individual 
right.  Group and individual rights need not be mutually 
exclusive. In this case, it is not one or the other but both that 
apply to the impugned legislation.  

7  	Whether the Creamy Layer exists outside India?:

47.	An interesting question arises:  does the concept of creamy 
layer exist outside India?   A 2003 study carried out in the 
United States suggests that it does.  The study by William 
Bowen, former president of Princeton University, found that 
when you look at students with the same Scholastic Aptitude 
Test (SAT) scores, certain groups have a better chance of being 
admitted to college. "The New Affirmative Action," by David 
Leonhardt, New York Times, 30 September 2007, p. 3. All things 
being equal, one's chance of gaining admission is augmented by 
belonging to one of the preferred groups. Individuals belonging to 
these groups are given preferential treatment over those who do 
not. 

48.	The study demonstrated that Black, Latino and Native-
Americans with the same SAT scores as White or Asian students 
had a 28% better chance than the White or Asian students at 
gaining admission; those whose parents attended the college had 
a 20% advantage over those whose parents did not; and the poor 
received no advantage whatsoever over the rich. (See: New York 
Times article, p. 3.) 

49.	The statistics indicate that the failure to exclude the creamy 
layer ultimately leads to a situation in which deserving students 
are excluded.  When we revert to the Indian scenario, as long as 
the Government gives handouts to certain groups, the creamy 
layer therein will "lap" them up.  A scheme in which the poor 
receive no advantage can be remedied by excluding the creamy 
layer.  
50.	Even the Mandal Commission, which was established in 
1979 with a mandate to identify the socially and educationally 
backward, admitted that the creamy layer was robbing fellow 
OBCs of reservation.  In reference to Tamil Nadu, it said: "In 
actual operation, the benefits of reservation have gone primarily 
to the relatively more advanced castes amongst the notified 
backward classes."  (See: P.37, 8.13 of the Report of the 
Backward Classes Commission, First Part, Vols. 1-2, 1980).  It 
also stated that: "it is no doubt true that the major benefits of 
reservation..will be cornered by the more advanced 
sections.." but reasoned that this was acceptable because 
reform is presumably slow and should start with the more 
advanced of the backward. (See: Page 62, para 13.7 
(recommendations)).

51.	In N. M. Thomas &amp; Others case  (supra), Krishna Iyer, J. 
in his concurring judgment in para 124 noted that the research 
conducted by the A.N. Sinha Institute of Social Studies, Patna, 
had revealed a dual society among harijans in which a tiny elite 
gobbles up the benefits. 

7   	Severing the Creamy Layer
52.	Technically speaking, I am severing the implied inclusion of 
the creamy layer.  It is severable for two reasons. First, a nine-
Judge Bench in Sawhney I severed a similar provision wherein 
the creamy layer was not expressly included, upholding the rest 
of the O.M.'s reservation scheme.  Second, because the 
Parliament must have known that   Sawhney I had excluded the 
creamy layer, it seems likely that the Parliament also realized 
that this Court may do the same. A cursory review of the 
Parliamentary Debates regarding Article 15(5) clearly reveals that 
the Parliament discussed the Sawhney I judgment in detail.  
(See: for example, comments made by Shri Mohan Singh, p.474 
and Shri Devendra Prasad, pages 478-479 on 21 December 
2005).  Had the Parliament insisted on creamy layer inclusion, it 
could have said as much in the text of 15(5).  Instead, the 
Parliament left the text of 15(5) silent on the issue, delegating the 
issue of OBC identification to the executive in Section 2(g) of the 
Reservation Act.  

53.	The test for severability asks a subjective question: had the 
Parliament known its provision would be struck would it still 
have passed the rest of the legislation? (See: R.M.D. 
Chamarbaugwalla &amp; Another v. Union of India &amp; Another, 
AIR 1957 SC 628 at page 637 at para 23).  It is never easy to say 
what the Parliament would have done had it known that part of 
its amendment would be severed.  Nevertheless, I find it hard to 
imagine that the Parliament would have said, "if the creamy is 
excluded, the rest of the OBCs should be denied reservation in 
education."   It seems unlikely that it would have been an all-or-
nothing proposition for the Parliament, when the very goal of the 
impugned legislation of promoting OBC educational 
advancement does not depend on creamy layer inclusion.  For 
these reasons, I sever or exclude the implied inclusion of the 
creamy layer. 

7  	Identification of Creamy Layer 
54.	Income as the criterion for creamy layer exclusion is 
insufficient and runs afoul of Sawhney I.  (See: page 724 at para 
792).  Identification of the creamy layer has been and should be 
left to the Government, subject to judicial direction.  For a valid 
method of creamy layer exclusion, the Government may use its 
post-Sawhney I criteria as a template.  (See: O.M. of 8-9-1993, 
para 2(c)/Column 3, approved by this Court in Ashoka Kumar 
Thakur (supra), para 10).  This schedule is a comprehensive 
attempt to exclude the creamy layer in which income, 
Government posts, occupation and land holdings are taken into 
account.  The Office Memorandum is reproduced hereunder:
"No. 36012/22/93- Estt (SCT) 
Government of India 
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances &amp; Pension 
(Department of Personnel &amp; Training) 
New Delhi, the 8th September, 1993  
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM 
Subject:	Reservation for Other Backward Classes in Civil 
Posts and Services under the Government of 
India  Regarding. 
	The undersigned is directed to refer to this Department's 
O.M. No.36012/31/90-Estt(SCT) dated 13th August, 1990 and 
25th September, 1991 regarding reservation for Socially and 
Economically Backward Classes in Civil Posts and Services 
under the Government of India and to say that following the 
Supreme Court judgment in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India 
&amp; Others (Writ Petition (Civil) No.930 of 1990) the Government 
of India appointed an Expert Committee to recommend the 
criteria for exclusion of the socially advanced persons/sections 
from the benefits of reservation for Other Backward Classes in 
civil posts and services under Government of India.
2.	Consequent to the consideration of the Expert Committee's 
recommendation this Department's Office Memorandum 
No.36012/31/90-Estt. (SCT), dated 13.8.1990 referred to in para 
(1) above is hereby modified to provide as follows:-
(a)	27% (Twenty seven percent) of the vacancies in civil posts 
and services under the Government of India, to be filled 
through direct recruitment, shall be reserved for the Other 
Backward Classes.  Detailed instructions relating to the 
procedure to be followed for enforcing reservation will be 
issued separately.
(b)	Candidates belonging to OBCs recruited on the basis of 
merit in an open competition on the same standards 
prescribed for the general candidates shall not be adjusted 
against the reservation quota of 27%.
(c)     (i)	The aforesaid reservation shall not apply to 
persons/sections mentioned in column 3 of the 
Schedule to this Office Memorandum.
(ii)	The rule of exclusion will not apply to persons working 
as artisans or engaged in hereditary occupations, 
callings.  A list of such occupations, callings will be 
issued separately by the Ministry of Welfare.
(d)	The OBCs for the purpose of the aforesaid reservation 
would comprise, in the first phase, the castes and communities 
which are common to both the lists in the report of the Mandal 
Commission and the State Government's Lists.  A list of such 
castes and communities is being issued separately by the 
Ministry of Welfare.
(e)	The aforesaid reservation shall take immediate effect.  
However, this will not apply in vacancies where the recruitment 
process has already been initiated prior to the issue of this order.
3.	Similar instructions in respect of public sector 
undertakings and financial institutions including public sector 
banks will be issued by the Department of Public Enterprises 
and by the Ministry of Finance respectively from the date of this 
Office Memorandum.	
SCHEDULE

Description of 
Category
To whom rule of exclusion will 
apply.

I.

CONSTITUTIONAL 
POSTS

Son(s) and daughter(s) of

(a) President of India;

(b) Vice President of India;

(c) Judges of the Supreme Court 
and of the High Courts;

(d) Chairman &amp; Members of 
UPSC and of the State Public 
Service Commission; Chief 
Election Commissioner; 
Comptroller &amp; Auditor General of 
India;

(e) Persons holding 
Constitutional positions of like 
nature.

II.

SERVICE CATEGORY

A. Group A/Class 1 
officers of the All India 
Central and State 
Services (Direct 
Recruits)



Son(s) and daughter(s) of

(a) parents, both of whom are 
Class I officers;

(b) parents, either of whom is a 
Class I officer;

(c) parents, both of whom are 
Class I officers, but one of them 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation.

(d) parents, either of whom is a 
Class I officer and such parent 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation and before such 
death or such incapacitation has 
had the benefit of employment in 
any International Organisation 
like UN, IMF, World Bank, etc. for 
a period of not less than 5 years.

(e) parents, both of whom are 
class I officers die or suffer 
permanent incapacitation and 
before such death or such 
incapacitation of the both, either 
of them has had the benefit of 
employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank, etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years.

(f) Provided that the rule of 
exclusion shall not apply in the 
following cases :-

(a) Sons and daughters of 
parents either of whom or 
both of whom are Class-I 
officers and such parent(s) 
dies / die or suffer permanent 
incapacitation.

(b) A lady belonging to OBC 
category has got married to a 
Class-I officer, and may 
herself like to apply for a job.

Group B/Class II 
officers of the Central &amp; 
State Services (Direct 
Recruitment)
Son(s) and daughter(s) of

(a) parents both of whom are 
Class II officers.

(b) parents of whom only the 
husband is a Class II officer and 
he gets into Class I at the age of 
40 or earlier.

(c) parents, both of whom are 
Class II officers and one of them 
dies or suffers permanent 
incapacitation and either one of 
them has had the benefit of 
employment in any International 
Organisation like UN, IMF, World 
Bank, etc. for a period of not less 
than 5 years before such death or 
permanent incapacitation;

(d) parents, of whom the husband 
is a Class I officer (direct recruit 
or pre-forty promoted) and the 
wife is a Class II officer and the 
wife dies; or suffers permanent 
incapacitation; and

(e) parents, of whom the wife is a 
Class I officer (Direct Recruit or 
pre-forty promoted) and the 
husband is a Class II officer and 
the husband dies or suffers 
permanent incapacitation.

Provided that the rule of 
exclusion shall not apply in the 
following cases:
Sons and daughters of

(a) Parents both of whom are 
Class II officers and one of 
them dies or suffers 
permanent incapacitation.

(b) Parents, both of whom are 
Class II officers and both of 
them die or suffer permanent 
incapacitation, even though 
either of them has had the 
benefit of employment in any 
International Organisation 
like UN, IMF, World Bank, etc. 
for a period of not less than 5 
years before their death or 
permanent incapacitation.

C. Employees in Public 
Sector Undertakings 
etc.
The criteria enumerated in A &amp; B 
above in this Category will apply 
mutatis mutandi to officers 
holding equivalent or comparable 
posts in PSUs, banks, Insurance 
Organisations, Universities, etc. 
and also to equivalent or 
comparable posts and positions 
under private employment, 
Pending the evaluation of the 
posts on equivalent or 
comparable basis in these 
institutions, the criteria specified 
in Category VI below will apply to 
the officers in these Institutions.

III.

ARMED FORCES 
INCLUDING 
PARAMILITARY 
FORCES

(Persons holding civil 
posts are not included)



Son(s) and daughter(s) of parents 
either or both of whom is or are 
in the rank of Colonel and above 
in the Army and to equivalent 
posts in the Navy and the Air 
Force and the Para Military 
Forces;

Provided that:-

(i) if the wife of an Armed 
Forces Officer is herself in the 
Armed Forces (i.e., the 
category under consideration) 
the rule of exclusion will apply 
only when she herself has 
reached the rank of Colonel;

(ii) the services ranks below 
Colonel of husband and wife 
shall not be clubbed together:

(iii) if the wife of an officer in 
the Armed Forces is in civil 
employment, this will not be 
taken into account for 
applying the rule of exclusion 
unless the falls in the service 
category under item No.II in 
which case the criteria and 
conditions enumerated 
therein will apply to her 
independently.

IV.
PROFESSIONAL CLASS 
AND THOSE 
ENGANGED IN TRADE 
AND INDUSTRY

(I) Persons engaged in 
profession as a doctor, 
lawyer, Chartered 
Accountant, Income-
Tax Consultant, 
financial or 
management 
consultant, dental 
surgeon, engineer, 
architect, computer 
specialist, film artists 
and other film 
professional, author, 
playwright, sports 
person, sports 
professional, media 
professional or any 
other vocations of like 
status. Criteria 
specified against 
Category VI will apply:

(II) Persons engaged in 
trade, business and 
industry






Criteria specified against 
Category VI will apply:

Criteria specified against 
Category VI will apply:

Explanation:

(i) Where the husband is in 
some profession and the wife 
is in a Class II or lower grade 
employment, the income / 
wealth test will apply only on 
the basis of the husband's 
income.

(ii) If the wife is in any 
profession and the husband is 
in employment in a Class II or 
lower rank post, then the 
income/wealth criterion will 
apply only on the basis of the 
wife's income and the 
husband's income will not be 
clubbed with it.

V.

PROPERTY OWNERS

A. Agricultural holdings



Son(s) and daughter(s) of persons 
belonging to a family (father, 
mother and minor children) 
which owns

(a) only irrigated land which is 
equal to or more than 85% of the 
statutory ceiling area, or

(b) both irrigated and unirrigated 
land, as follows:

(i)	The rule of exclusion will 
apply where the pre-condition 
exists that the irrigated area 
(having been brought to a 
single type under a common 
denominator) 40% or more of 
the statutory ceiling, limit for 
irrigated land (this being, 
calculated by excluding the 
unirrigated portion). If this 
pre-condition of not less than 
40% exists, then only the area 
of unirrigated land will be 
taken into account. This will 
be done by converting the 
unirrigated land on the basis 
of the conversion formula 
existing, into the irrigated 
type. The irrigated area so 
computed from unirrigated 
land shall be added to the 
actual area of irrigated land 
and if after such clubbing 
together the total area in 
terms of irrigated land is 80% 
or more of the statutory 
ceiling limit for irrigated land, 
then the rule of exclusion will 
apply and dis-entitlement will 
occur.

(ii)	The rule of exclusion will 
not apply if the land holding of 
a family is exclusively 
unirrigated.

B. Plantations

(i) Coffee, tea, rubber, 
etc. 

(ii) Mango, citrus, apple 
plantations etc. 



Criteria of income/wealth 
specified in Category VI below 
will apply.

Deemed as agricultural holding 
and hence criteria at A above 
under this Category will apply.

C. Vacant land and/or 
buildings in urban 
areas or urban 
agglomerations

Criteria specified in Category VI 
below will apply.

Explanation: Building may be 
used for residential, industrial or 
commercial purpose and the like 
two or more such purposes.

VI.
INCOME/WEALTH 
TEST
Son(s) and daughter(s) of

(a) Persons having gross income 
of Rs.1 lakh or above or 
possessing wealth above the 
exemption limit as prescribed in 
the Wealth Tax Act for a period of 
three years.

(b) Persons in Categories I, II, III 
and VA who are not disentitled to 
the benefit of reservation but 
have income from other sources 
of wealth which will bring them 
within the income/wealth criteria 
mentioned in (a) above.

Explanation:

(i)	Income from salaries or 
agricultural land shall not be 
clubbed;

(ii)	The income criteria in 
terms of rupee will be 
modified taking into account 
the change in its value every 
three years.  If the situation, 
however, so demands, the 
interregnum may be less.

Explanation: Wherever the 
expression "permanent 
incapacitation" occur in this 
schedule, it shall mean 
incapacitation which results 
in putting an officer out of 
service.

Smt. Sarita Prasad
Joint Secretary to the Government of India."

55.	In sum, the schedule excludes the children of those who 
hold constitutional posts, e.g., the children of the President of 
India, Supreme Court Judges, Chairman and Members of UPSC 
and others are excluded.  Class 1 Officers' children are not 
eligible for OBC perks either.  When both parents are Class-II 
Officers, their children are excluded.  The same criteria that 
apply to Class-I and II officers apply to children of parents who 
work at high levels within the private sector.  Agricultural owners 
are excluded when their irrigated holdings are more than or 
equal to 85% of the statutory ceiling.  The O.M. further excludes 
persons having a gross annual income of Rs.2.5 lakh or more.  
The Government raised the income limit from Rs.1 to Rs.2.5 lakh 
on 09.03.2004 vide O.M. 36033/3/2004. 

56.	The creamy layer schedule of the O.M. dated 8.9.93, in my 
opinion, is not comprehensive.  This should be revised 
periodically - preferably once in every 5 years, in order to ensure 
that creamy layer criteria take changing circumstances into 
account. 

57.	Apart from the people who have been excluded vide the 
office memo, I urge the Government to make it more 
comprehensive.  The Government should consider excluding the 
children of sitting and former Members of Parliament (MP) and 
Members of Legislative Assemblies (MLA) from special benefits.  If 
constitutional authorities have been excluded from benefits 
because of their status or resources, the same should apply to 
children of former and sitting MPs and MLAs.  I hope the 
judiciary will not have to involve itself in this matter.  

2.  	Applying Article 21A to the Reservation Act
58.	On 18 December 2006, in the Rajya Sabha Debate on the 
Reservation Act, Member of Parliament and former Governor,  
Dr. P.C. Alexander summed up what would become one of 
Petitioners' arguments.  Should Rs.17,000 crores be spent on 
implementing the Reservation Act for higher education when 
primary/secondary schooling is in such bad shape? Dr. 
Alexander stated: 
"Sir, this spending Rs.17,000 crores or whatever 
amount is needed for adding seats in the Engineering 
colleges, IIMs and IITs is reversing our priorities.  If 
you have the money for education, spend it on 
schools.  Spend it on the rural areas for primary 
schools; spend it on the schools, which are poorly 
starved in the urban areas.  Instead of doing that, you 
spend it by adding to the numbers because you want 
to appease the so-called poorer sections in the higher 
castes.   So, we have taken care of you and you tell the 
backward classes we are taking care of all of you.  This 
is where we land ourselves in trouble.  We have cash 
resources.  They should be spent where priorities are 
fixed clearly in our eyes and we don't want to do that."

Spending on higher at the expense of lower education raises the 
specter of conflict with Article 21A. By the 86th Amendment, 
Article 21A was inserted in our Constitution.  Article 21A reads 
as follows:
"The State shall provide free and compulsory 
education to all children of the age of six to fourteen 
years in such manner as the State may, by law, 
determine."   

59.	Under Article 21A, it is a mandatory obligation of the State 
to provide free and compulsory education to all children aged six 
to fourteen.  In order to achieve this constitutional mandate, the 
State has to place much greater emphasis on allocating more 
funds for primary and secondary education.  There is no 
corresponding constitutional right to higher education.  The 
entire Nation's progress virtually depends upon the proper and 
effective implementation of Article 21A.

60.	This Court in Unni Krishnan, J.P. &amp; Others v. State of 
Andhra Pradesh &amp; Others (1993) 1 SCC 645 para 166 held as 
under:
" right to education is implicit in and flows from the 
right to life guaranteed by Article 21.  That the right to 
education has been treated as one of transcendental 
importance in the life of an individual [and] has been 
recognized not only in this country since thousands of 
years, but all over the world.  without education 
being provided to citizens of this country, the 
objectives set forth in the Preamble to the Constitution 
cannot be achieved.  The Constitution would fail."

This observation encouraged the Parliament to insert Article 21A 
into the Constitution.  

61.	In Unni Krishnan (supra), Justice Reddy observed that the 
quality of education in Government schools was extremely poor 
and that the schools were woefully inadequate to the needs of the 
children.  He noted that many countries spend 6% to 8% of 
Gross Domestic Product on education. Our expenditure on 
education is just 4% of GDP.   

62.	Though an improvement over past performance, the overall 
education picture leaves much to be desired.  The bad news is 
really bad.  Even where we have seen improvement, there is still 
failure.  A survey by Pratham, an NGO, fleshes out the acute 
problems found in rural schools. (See: ASER 2007  Rural Annual 
Status of Education Report for 2007, published on January 16, 
2008).  The survey covered 16,000 villages. As Pratham 
indicates, there are an estimated 140 million children in the age 
group 6 to 14 years in primary schools. Of these 30 million 
cannot read, 40 million can recognize a few alphabets, 40 million 
can read some words, and 30 million can read paragraphs. Over 
55 million of these children will not complete four years of 
school, eventually adding to the illiterate population of India. The 
national literacy rate is 65%. 

63.	24 districts with more than 50,000 out of school children 
means we have failed 24 times over.  71 districts in which there 
are 60 students per teacher is just as bad, if not worse. 
According to Pratham (and in line with the Ministry of HRD's six-
month review), the number of out of school children has hovered 
around 7,50,000. [page 6]. Moreover, it goes without saying that 
children need proper facilities.  Today, just 59% of schools can 
boast of a useable toilet. [page 49].  

64.	The quality of education is equally troubling. For 
standards I and II, only 78.3% of students surveyed could 
recognize letters and read words or more in their own language. 
[page 47].  In 2006, it was even worse  only 73.1% could do so.  
It is disheartening to peruse the statistics for standards III to V, 
where only 66.4% could read Standard I text or more in their 
own language in 2007. [page 47]. As Pratham stated at page 7:
"What should be more worrying though, is the fact 
that in class 2, only 9 percent children can read the 
text appropriate to them, and 60 percent cannot even 
recognise numbers between 10 and 99."

65.	In the third to fifth standards, 40% of students surveyed 
could not subtract. The latest figures indicate that 58.3% 
children in the fifth standard read at the level appropriate  for 
second Standard students. [page 32].  In both 2005 and 2007, 
only 74.1% of enrolled children were in attendance. [page 49].

66.	The learned Solicitor General, Mr Vahanvati, submitted that 
the Government has now placed sufficient emphasis on primary 
education. In 2001-2002, the Government launched Sarva 
Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA).  This national programme's goal is to 
universalize elementary education.  It supplements 
Governmental spending on education.  As the Solicitor General 
explained, it was founded on the idea that education for those 
between the ages of six to fourteen is a fundamental right.  In 
this way, SSA seeks to fulfill the Government's obligation under 
Article 21A to provide free and compulsory education to this age 
group.  Some of the SSA's accomplishments merit mention. 

67.	By March 2007, 2,03,577 toilets had been constructed or 
were under construction, covering 87% of the goal; more than six 
crore free textbooks had been supplied  96% of the goal; 
1,93,220 new schools had been completed or were under 
construction, i.e., 80% of the desired mark. The learned Solicitor 
General further provided that enrolment for all districts in 2004-
05 for classes I-V was 11,82,96,540.  In 2005-06, the number 
increased to 12,46,15,546.  A similar increase was seen in 
Classes VI-VII/VIII:  from 3,77,17,490 to 4,36,67,786. The total 
number of teachers increased from 36,67,637 in 2003-04 to 
46,90,176 in 2005-06.  

68.	It is the learned Solicitor General's contention that SSA was 
responsible for many of the gains cited above.  This includes the 
improved statistics on the student-teacher ratio, out of school 
children and enrollment rate for girls.   

69.	While the Government is on the right track with regard to 
improving the infrastructure of our system, books and buildings 
only go so far.  They are necessary but not sufficient for 
achieving the ultimate goals of (1) keeping children in school, (2) 
ensuring that they learn how to think critically and (3) ensuring 
that they learn skills that will help them secure gainful 
employment.  The quality of education provided in the majority of 
primary schools is woeful.  That is why I find it necessary to 
review Government spending on education  especially at the 
primary/secondary level.  

70.	Undoubtedly, the Government has allocated more funds of 
late for education, but we need to have far more allocation of 
funds and much greater emphasis on free and compulsory 
education.  Anything less would flout Article 21A's mandate.  
According to H.R.D. Annual Reports read with the Union of India 
Budget 2008-09, we spend roughly seven times as much on the 
individual college student than the individual primary or 
secondary student.  
Spending per Student: Comparing that which is spent 
on each primary/secondary student versus each higher 
education student
Year &amp; Level of 
Schooling
Estimated # of 
Enrolled Students*
Total Rs. 
Allocated**
Expenditure per 
student in Rs.
2006-2007
School Education/ 
Literacy
219083879
168970000000
771
2006-2007
Tertiary Education
11777296
69120900000
5868
2007-2008
School Education/
Literacy
219083879
231913500000
1059
2007-2008
Tertiary Education
11777296
63973600000
5432
2008-2009
School Education/
Literacy
219083879
278500000000
1271
2008-2009
Tertiary Education
11777296
108528700000
9215
* = Estimated number of students for primary/secondary level is taken from 
2004-2005 Annual Report, p. 250 at 
http://www.education.nic.in/AR/AR0607-en.pdf. In the same Annual 
Report, 11777296 students were enrolled in higher education in 2004-
2005.  For consistency's sake, I have used the 2004-2005 estimates.  I have 
found no information that suggests that enrolment for one has significantly 
outpaced the other. 

** = Government of India, Expenditure Budget Vol. 1, 2008-2009, p. 6, Total Expenditure 
of Ministries/Departments (school education/literacy and higher education have been added).

71.	In a country where only 18% of those in the relevant age 
group make it to higher education, this is incredible.  See NSSO 
1999-2000.  It is not suggested that higher education needs to 
be neglected or that higher education should not receive more 
funds, but there has to be much greater emphasis on the 
primary education. Our priorities have to be changed.  Nothing is 
really more important than to ensure  total compliance with 
Article 21A.  How can a sizeable portion of the population be 
precluded from realizing the benefits of development when 
almost everyone acknowledges that the children are our future?

72.	Education for children up to the age of fourteen years 
should be free.  This has also been suggested in the 
recommendations of the Kothari Commission on Education in 
1966.  Taking the country's rampant poverty into account, free 
education up to the age 14 years is absolutely imperative. There 
is no other way for the poor to climb their way out of this 
predicament. 

73.	Mr. P.P. Rao, learned Senior Advocate, rightly submitted 
that when you lack a school building, teachers, books and 
proper facilities, your schooling might be "free" but it is not an 
"education" in any proper sense.  Adequate number of schools 
must be established with proper infrastructure without further 
delay.  In order to achieve the constitutional goal of free and 
compulsory education, we have to appreciate the reality on the 
ground.   A sizeable section of the country is still so poor that 
many parents are compelled to send their children to work.  The 
State must carve out innovative policies to ensure that parents 
send their children to school.  The Mid-Day Meal Scheme will go 
a long way in achieving this goal.  But, apart from Mid-Day 
Meals, the Government should provide financial help to 
extremely poor parents.   

74.	In addition to free education and/or other financial 
assistance, they should also be given books, uniforms and any 
other necessary benefits so that the object of Article 21A is 
achieved.  Time and again, this Court, in a number of judgments, 
has observed that the State cannot avoid its constitutional 
obligation on the ground of financial inabilities. (See: 
Hussainara Khatoon &amp; Others (III) v. Home Secretary, State 
of Bihar, Patna (1980) 1 SCC 98, 107 at para 10).  

75.	In Vasanth Kumar (supra) at para 150, Justice 
Venkataramiah suggested that the State provide preferential 
treatment such as tuition, scholarships, free boarding and 
lodging, etc.  According to UNESCO's Education for All, Global 
Monitoring Report (2008) at page 115, at least fourteen countries 
have cash-transfer programmes that target poor households with 
school-age children.  The largest programme is in Brazil, where 
46 million people receive an education transfer of up to $44 USD 
monthly per household in extreme poverty with children below 
age 16.  According to the Report, the programme has reduced 
drop-out rates by up to 75% among beneficiaries in its more 
recent stage.  

76.	Such a programme is not foreign to India. According to 
UNICEF, the State of Gujarat put the idea of financial incentives 
for youth into action: 
"Figures indicate that the school enrolment drive of 
the state Government supported by incentives like 
Vidyalaxmi bond of Rs.1,000 given to each girl who 
completes primary education and 60 kg of wheat for 
tribal girls attending school, has met with significant 
success. In addition to the various incentives by the 
Government, many a corporate houses and 
community have also come forward to motivate 
parents and children by donating school bags, 
uniforms, stationery, etc. As a result, the drop-out 
rate has come down from 35.31 % in 1997-1998 to 
3.24% in 2006-2007 in class 1-5. In girls, this rate 
has dropped from 38.95% to 5.97 in the same time 
period."

77.	In January 2008, Haryana Chief Minister Mr. Bhupinder 
Singh Hooda unfurled an incentive scheme for SC students in 
which students would receive a one-time payment in addition to 
a monthly stipend for attending school. (See: "Incentives 
announced to curb dropout rate", The Tribune, 5 Jan. 2008).  
The relevant portion is mentioned hereinbelow:
"Secretary, education, Rajan Gupta said a one-time 
allowance of Rs.740 to Rs.1,450 would be given to SC 
students from class I to XII.  Under the monthly 
incentive scheme, boys and girls studying in class I to 
V would be given Rs100 and Rs.150, respectively, per 
month and boys and girls of class VI to VIII Rs.150 
and Rs.200. Similarly, boys and girls of class IX to XII 
would be given Rs.200 and Rs.300, respectively, and 
boys and girls studying science subjects in class XI 
and XII Rs.300 and Rs.400, respectively.  This 
monthly incentive to the students would be deposited 
in their bank accounts to maintain transparency in 
the scheme, he added."

78.	In the name of transparency, students' attendance records 
could be made available to administrators and parents.  
Students would be paid to attend school.  They would receive a 
sum for each day of school that they attended.  If you only attend 
7 out of 10 school days, you would only receive 70% of the 
stipend.  

79.	Ultimately, this is the most important aspect of 
implementing Article 21A, incentives should be provided to 
parents so that they are persuaded to send their children to 
school. More than punishment, creative incentive programmes 
will go a long way in the implementation of the fundamental right 
enshrined under Article 21A.

7 	Historical Perspective on Compulsory Education:

80.	Almost two centuries ago, Clause 43 of The Charter Act of 
1813 made education a State responsibility.  [See: "Free and 
Compulsory Education:  Genesis and Execution of Constitutional 
Philosophy", Dr. P.L. Mehta and Rakhi Poonga, Deep and Deep 
Publications, New Delhi (1997)]. [pages 42-47]. The Hunter 
Commission (1882-83) was the first to recommend universal 
education in India.  Thereafter, the Patel Bill, 1917 was the first 
compulsory education legislation.   It proposed to make 
education compulsory from ages 6 to 11.  

81.	The Government of India Act, 1935 provided that 
"education should be made free and compulsory for both boys 
and girls."  Free and compulsory education got a further boost 
when the Zakir Hussain Commission recommended that the 
State should provide it. The 1944 Sargent Report strongly 
recommended free and compulsory education for children aged 
six to fourteen.  By 1947, primary education had been made 
compulsory in 152 urban areas and 4995 rural areas. 

82.	The State has been making some endeavour to provide free 
and compulsory education since 1813 in one form or the other. 
When the original Framers gathered at the Constituent 
Assembly, their desire to provide free and compulsory education 
was well established. The real question in the Debate was 
whether the original Framers would make free and compulsory 
education justiciable or not.  They oscillated between the 
options, first placing it in the fundamental rights and later 
moving it to the directive principles of State policies under Article 
45 of the Constitution.  

83.	Over 50 years later, the Parliament revisited the subject.  
The Parliamentary debate on Article 21A offers a glimpse into the 
history of compulsory education in other countries.  The then 
Minister of Human Resource Development, Dr. M.M. Joshi, 
referred to the speech of Shri Gopal Krishna Gokhale on 
compulsory education.  While debating a bill in the imperial 
legislative council in 1911, Shri Gokhale said that in most 
countries:
"elementary education is both compulsory and 
free, and in a few, though the principle of compulsion 
is not strictly enforced or has not been introduced it is 
either wholly or for the most part gratitutious, in India 
alone it is neither compulsory nor free.  Thus in Great 
Britain and Ireland, France, Germany, Switzerland, 
Austria, Hungary, Italy, Belguim, Norway, Sweden, the 
United States of America, Canada, Australia and 
Japan it is compulsory and free. . In Spain, 
Portugal, Greece, Bulgaria, Servia and Rumania, it is 
free, and in theory, compulsory, though compulsion is 
not strictly enforced." [Lok Sabha Debates, 28 
November, 2001, Vol.20, page 476].

84.	In 1948, the United Nations made its own pronouncement 
on compulsory education.  Article 26(1) of the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights made free and compulsory 
education a lofty if not enforceable goal.  While many states 
consider it an authoritative interpretation of the United Nations 
Charter, the Declaration is not a treaty and is not intended to be 
legally binding.  Article 26(1) states:
"Everyone has the right to education. Education shall 
be free, at least in the elementary and fundamental 
stages. Elementary education shall be compulsory. 
Technical and professional education shall be made 
generally available and higher education shall be 
equally accessible to all on the basis of merit."

85.	Our original Framers put a similar emphasis on the matter, 
placing free and compulsory education in the Directive 
Principles.  The un-amended Article 45 provided that:
"The State shall endeavour to provide, within a 
period of ten years from the commencement of this 
Constitution, for free and compulsory education for all 
children until they complete the age of fourteen years."

86.	At this juncture, I deem it appropriate to refer to the 
Parliamentary Debate on the aspect of free and compulsory 
education.  In the Lok Sabha debate of 28 November 2001 at Vol. 
20, Shri M.V.V.S. Murthi, at page 499, stated: 

"Unless the Government makes primary education 
compulsory, no village can develop.  If I say what they 
are doing in Andhra Pradesh, some Members may 
again cry foul.  In Andhra Pradesh, we are having 
Education Committees.  If there are any dropouts, the 
Committee will go to the village and find out the 
reason as to why they have dropped out.  It is very 
important."

87.	The Report of the Kothari Commission, 1964-1966, headed 
by Prof. D. S. Kothari, provided important recommendations on 
compulsory education.  Nevertheless, the circumstances of the 
day compelled it to soften its suggestions.  The Nation was 
relatively poor and could not afford drastic increases in 
education spending.  Some excerpts of this report are reproduced 
as under:
"5.01. But in any given society and at a given time, 
the decisions regarding the type, quantity and quality 
of educational facilities depend partly upon the 
resources available and partly upon the social and 
political philosophy of the people. Poor and traditional 
societies are unable to develop even a programme of 
universal primary education. But rich and 
industrialized societies provide universal secondary 
education and expanding and broad-based 
programmes of higher and adult education. Feudal 
and aristocratic societies emphasize education for a 
few. But democratic and socialistic societies 
emphasize mass education and equalization of 
educational opportunities. The principal problem to be 
faced in the development of human resources, 
therefore, is precisely this: How can available 
resources be best deployed to secure the most 
beneficial form of educational development? How 
much education, of what type or level of quality, 
should society strive to provide and for whom?
5.03 Increasing the Educational Level of Citizens. In 
the next two decades the highest priority must be 
given to programmes aimed at raising the educational 
level of the average citizen. Such programmes are 
essential on grounds of social justice, for making 
democracy viable and for improving the productivity of 
the average worker in agriculture and industry. The 
most crucial of these programmes is to provide, as 
directed by Article 45 of the Constitution, free and 
compulsory education of good quality to all children 
up to the age of 14 years. In view of the immense 
human and physical resources needed, however, the 
implementation of this programme will have to be 
phased over a period of time."
88.	When Article 21A was introduced, some Members of 
Parliament argued that financially poor parents who fail to send 
their children to school should not be punished and that the 
word "compulsion" in this Article should be understood to apply 
exclusively to the State. 

89.	Let me examine this argument.  The 86th Amendment made 
three changes to the Constitution.  It added Articles 21A and 
51A(k) and amended Article 45.  I turn my focus to Article 
51A(k).  In addition to rejecting an amendment that would have 
neutered compulsory education, the Parliament made a positive 
gesture.  Though it never passed legislation seeking to implement 
compulsory education, it had not completely ignored the subject. 
From Article 51A(k), it becomes clear that parents would be 
responsible for sending their children to school. Article 51A read 
with 51A(k) is reproduced as under:  
"It shall be the duty of every citizen of India  who is a 
parent or guardian to provide opportunities for 
education to his child or, as the case may be, ward 
between the age of six and fourteen years."  
90.	Just as Article 51A(a) does not penalize disrespect of the 
National Flag, Article 51A(k) does not penalize parents/guardian 
for failing to send children to school.  There is, of course, 
legislation that gives teeth to Article 51A(a). (See: The Prevention 
of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971, Section 3A).  

91.	Article 51A(k) indicates that it is parents, not the State, who 
are responsible for making sure children wake up on time and 
reach school.  Thus, Article 21A read with Article 51A(k) 
distributes an obligation amongst the State and parents:  the 
State is concerned with free education, parents with compulsory.  
Notwithstanding parental duty, the State also has a role to play 
in ensuring that compulsory education is feasible  a topic I will 
cover below.  

92.	The Central Government has made some effort to fulfill its 
obligation under Article 21A with regard to "free education." 
Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan is one such example.  When it comes to 
"compulsory education," the Central Government has made no 
such effort.  The Parliament has not passed any legislation.  The 
executive has not issued any order.  What we have is a 
patchwork of different State and Union Territory laws. These 
States/UTs (and NCR) include: 
Assam, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhatisgarh, Goa, 
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &amp; 
Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, 
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, 
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Delhi, 
Andaman &amp; Nicobar Islands.  

93.	The majority of the States and Union Territories levy very 
small fines on parents.  I note that these laws do not go into 
effect with one unexcused absence.  Notice is given to the 
parents, giving them time to remedy the problem.   Of course, 
enforcement is almost always a different story.   

94.	In contrast to the relatively light aforementioned sentences, 
the Compulsory Education Bill, 2006 introduced in the Rajya 
Sabha would provide six months imprisonment as a penalty for 
those who preclude children from going to school. If this Bill 
becomes law, Section 7 would dictate the following:  
"If any person including parents of children prevents 
any boy or girl child from going to school or causes 
hindrance or obstruction in any way, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment, which may extend to 
six months."

95.	It seems that the Bill simultaneously targets employers and 
parents.  Employers would be punished when they hire a child to 
work too much or during school hours.  Similarly, parents would 
also be punished for allowing this to happen. The Bill would also 
provide for scholarships, free hostel facilities and other 
incentives, "whenever necessary" and "as may be prescribed".  

96.	In Bandhua Mukti Morcha v. Union of India &amp; Others, 
(1997) 10 SCC 549 at page 557 at para 11, the Court explained 
why education should be compulsory.  In essence, a citizen is 
only free when he can make a meaningful challenge to his fellow 
citizens or Government's attempt to curtail his natural freedom.  
For this to happen, he needs a certain degree of education. This 
is why Article 21A may be the most important fundamental right. 
Without it, a citizen may never come to know of his other rights; 
nor would he have the resources to adequately enforce them.  
The relevant passage at para 11 reads as under:-
"A free educated citizen could meaningfully exercise 
his political rights, discharge social responsibilities 
satisfactorily and develop a spirit of tolerance and 
reform.  Therefore, education is compulsory.  Primary 
education to the children, in particular, to the child 
from poor, weaker sections, Dalits and Tribes and 
minorities is mandatory.  The basic education and 
employment-oriented vocational education should be 
imparted so as to empower the children within these 
segments of the society to retrieve them from poverty 
and, thus, develop basic abilities  to live a 
meaningful life  Compulsory education, therefore, to 
these children is one of the principal means and 
primary duty of the State for stability of the 
democracy, social integration and to eliminate social 
tensions."  

97.	In contrast to Article 51A(k), State and Union Territory laws 
and Parliamentary intent with regard to Article 21A, the Court in 
Mukti Morcha was inclined to suggest, not hold, that the State 
was exclusively responsible for compulsory education.  It went on 
to reaffirm M.C. Mehta v. State of Tamil Nadu &amp; Others (child 
labour matter) (1996) 6 SCC 756.  In that case, the Court took 
up the issue of child labour in hazardous fields when it learnt of 
an accident in a cracker factory in Sivakasi. 

98.	The said case at para 28 identified poverty as the root cause 
of child labour:  
"Of the aforesaid causes, it seems to us that  poverty 
is basic reason which compels parents of a child, 
despite their unwillingness, to get it employed.  The 
Survey Report of the Ministry of Labour (supra) had 
also stated so.  Otherwise, no parents, specially no 
mother, would like that a tender-aged child should toil 
in a factory in a difficult condition, instead of its 
enjoying its childhood at home under the paternal 
gaze."  

99.	In other words, parents send children to work because 
parents have no other choice. Food comes first.  If the State does 
not provide extra income so as to remove the incentive to send 
children to work, it is wasting its time on mere gesture. The 
Court in para 29 concluded that action must be taken:   
"It may be that [child labour] would be taken care of to 
some extent by insisting on compulsory education.  
Indeed, Neera [Burns] thinks that if there is at all a 
blueprint for tackling the problem of child labour, it is 
education.  Even if it were to be so, the child of a poor 
parent would not receive education, if per force it has 
to earn to make the family meet both the ends.  
Therefore, unless the family is assured of income 
aliunde, problem of child labour would hardly get 
solved; and it is this vital question which has 
remained almost unattended.  We are, however, of the 
view that till an alternative income is assured to the 
family, the question of abolition of child labour would 
really remain will-o'-the-wisp." (emphasis added).

100.	It is interesting to note that compulsory education has been 
introduced in one form or the other in various countries.  From 
the historical experience of these nations, we learn that the 
legislation pertaining to compulsory education has played an 
important role in improving educational outcomes.  

7 	Compulsory education's roots in the United 
States 
	
101.	Compulsory education has had a long history outside of 
India. In 1852, the State of Massachusetts enacted the first 
compulsory attendance law in the United States; though 
compulsory education laws existed much earlier in many states, 
the first dating back to 1642 in Massachusetts.  "Were 
Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws Effective?  (See: 
An analysis from 1915 to 1939."  (2001) at p. 2. Prof. Adriana 
Lleras-Muney of Princeton University.) 

7 Reasons from abroad for implementing compulsory  
education:  

102.	Prof. Lleras-Muney explains that those who advocated 
for compulsory education believed that universal education was 
necessary to promote democracy and guarantee a common 
American culture.  (Page 11).  Given the influx of immigrants, 
some of whom came from undemocratic countries, many 
supporters of legislation viewed compulsory education as an 
instrument for assimilation.  

103.	Other reasons cited by compulsory education proponents in 
the United States included the reduction of crime, racism and 
inequality. Prof. Oreopoulos of the University of Toronto cites to 
sources that make it appear as though the reasons for adopting 
compulsory education in Canada mirrored those cited in the 
United States:  the emphasis was on good citizenship and 
economic development:   
        "Archibald Macallum, an Ontario teacher, 
summarized the latter argument vigorously in an 1875 
report favouring the introduction of compulsory 
schooling in Canada: 'Society has suffered so cruelly 
from ignorance, that its riddance is a matter of 
necessity, and by the universal diffusion of knowledge 
alone can ignorance and crime be banished from our 
midst; in no other way can the best interests of society 
be conserved and improved than by this one remedy  
the compulsory enforcement of this great boon  the 
right of every Canadian child to receive that education 
that will make him a good, loyal subject, prepared to 
serve his country in the various social functions which 
he may be called on to fill during his life; and prepare 
him, through grace, for the life to come' (Annual 
Report of the Ontario Teachers' Association, 1875, as 
cited in Prentice and Houston 1975, 1756). (See: The 
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 39, No.1, 
February (2006) "The compelling effects of compulsory 
schooling:  the evidence from Canada," Prof. 
Oreopoulos, at page 23)."  

7  Empirical data indicating that compulsory 
education has a positive effect:  

104. Prof. Oreopoulos provides data that show the fruits of 
imposing education on citizens.  Crime may be lowered, health 
improved and civic activity increased.  Compulsory education 
may also lead to a substantial increase in income for individuals.  
Moreover, compulsory education, if it does not cause, may at 
least contribute to an increase in bilingualism and employment 
and a reduction in poverty.  The relevant portion is reproduced 
hereunder: 
 "(Page 24). Other papers find evidence of social 
returns, but for non-pecuniary outcomes. Lochner and 
Moretti (2002), for example, find that compulsory 
schooling lowers crime, while Lleras-Muney (2002) 
finds a correlation with improved health. In studies of 
the United States and United Kingdom, Dee (2003) 
and Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopoulos (2003) estimate 
that tighter restrictions on leaving school early 
correspond to increased levels of civic activity (like 
voting and discussing politics).  My analysis 
suggests that students compelled to complete an extra 
grade of school have historically experienced an 
average increase of 915% in annual income.

(Page 48). 	I find that the introduction of tighter 
provincial restrictions on leaving school between 1920 
and 1990 raised average grade attainment and 
incomes. Students compelled to attend an extra year 
of school experienced an average increase in annual 
income of about 12%. I also find that compulsory 
schooling is associated with significant benefits in 
terms of other socio-economic outcome measures 
ranging from bilingualism, employment, and poverty 
status. These results hold up against many 
specifications checks and are entirely consistent with 
previous studies."

105.	In addition to increased income, Prof. Lleras-Muney found 
that legally requiring a child to attend school for one more year 
increased educational attainment by roughly five percentage 
points.  (Page 8).  Educational attainment refers to time spent in 
school.  
7   	Example of compulsory education statutes 

106.	The causes of low enrolment, high drop-out rates and 
frequent truancy in the U.S. and India differ, but the 
consequences thereof do not.  In either case, citizens who lack 
education are at an extreme disadvantage.  In India, poverty has 
been identified as the ultimate cause of lackluster enrolment and 
attendance rates.  Children are compelled to work.  In developed 
countries like the United States or Canada, children rarely fail to 
attend school because of economic constraints.  Instead, a 
number of different factors may contribute to truancy.  High 
school students may drop out " because they detest school, 
lack motivation, or anticipate little reward from graduation."  
(See: The Canadian Journal of Economics, "The compelling effects 
of compulsory schooling:  the evidence from Canada," Prof. 
Oreopoulos, p. 23, (quoting from Eckstein, Zvi, and Kenneth I. 
Wolpin (1999) "Why youths drop out of high school: the impact of 
preferences, opportunities, and abilities," Econometrica 67, 1295
339).   

107.	As I detail below, students and parents in the United States 
often face the same fines when students fail to attend school.  
Fines for students make more sense when low self-control is the 
reason for which they fail to attend school.  At the same time, 
punishing Indian students who have no choice but to work 
would make no sense.  Such a punishment should not be 
borrowed from the United States.  

108.	In many jurisdictions in the United States, the attendance 
officer is responsible for enforcing compulsory attendance laws 
for his area or school.  Given the overwhelming problem of sub-
par enrolment and attendance in India, we doubt that one school 
official could sufficiently do the work of inspecting places of 
employment for children who have violated attendance laws.  
109.	Indeed, existing legislation in India already envisages the 
employment of attendance officers. The Delhi Primary Education 
Act, 1960, Sec. 7.  Yet, there is nothing to suggest that these 
employees have adequately dealt with truancy.  As mentioned, 
this is, in part, due to the economic conditions in which many 
parents find themselves.  Financial assistance or incentives must 
be given.  Only then, may the Government actively enforce 
compulsory attendance legislation.  
110.	We must also remember that it is not only the child who 
fails to attend but also the child who fails to enroll that has 
violated an attendance law.  
111.	Before taking issue with State/Union Territory compulsory 
education statutes, I note that education has traditionally been 
reserved for the States. Only in 1976, vide the 42nd Amendment 
of the Constitution, did education become a part of Concurrent 
List of Schedule 7.  In its 165th Report, the Law Commission of 
India has also recommended enactment of Central Legislation in 
this respect. Putting education in the Concurrent List turns out 
to be a positive development, given the States' failure to provide 
effective legislation.  

112.	The States' laws fail on two accounts.  First, they are too 
lenient to have a deterrent effect.  Second, the legislation is not 
adequately enforced, in part, because it does not require police 
officers to do the job. If we analyze the legislation passed by 
different States, another conclusion becomes obvious: no State 
has provided for an adequate punishment whose effect would be 
to deter citizens from committing a violation.  

113.	It is necessary to reproduce some of the various compulsory 
education laws of the States.
114.	Under Section 7 of The Tamil Nadu Compulsory Elementary 
Education Act, 1994:
"Every parent or guardian of a child of school age who 
fails to discharge his duty under section 4 [duty of 
parent to cause child to attend elementary school] 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees."

115.	Section 18(1) of The Delhi Primary Education Act, 1960 
states:
"If any parent fails to comply with an attendance order 
passed under Section 13, he shall be punishable with 
fine not exceeding two rupees, and, in the case of 
continuing contravention, with an additional fine not 
exceeding fifty naye paise for every day during which 
such contravention continues after conviction for the 
first of such contraventions.  Provided that the 
amount of fine payable by any one person in respect of 
any child in any one year shall not exceed fifty 
rupees."

116.    Analysis of these State laws reveals that they are weak in 
character and perhaps have never been implemented.  If we 
compare these laws with their sister statutes in United States, 
we realize that the U.S. laws are far stronger.  
117.    In Wisconsin, parents who fail to send their children to 
school may have to pay a fine of not more than $500 or face 
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or both. [Wisconsin 
Statute Sections 118.15(1)(a) and 118.15(5)(a)1.a]. For a second 
or subsequent offense, they may face a fine of not more than 
$1,000 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or both. 
[Wisconsin Statute Sections 118.15(1)(a) and 118.15(5)(a)1.b].  
Alternatively, they may be sentenced to perform community 
service. [Wisconsin Statute Sections 118.15(1)(a) and 
118.15(5)(a)2] . 
Unlike Wisconsin, Tamil Nadu and Delhi's laws have no 
teeth.  

118.	The other main problem is implementation of these laws.  
Neither the State Governments nor their police agencies are at all 
serious about implementing these compulsory laws.  There are 
hardly any cases where even fines have been imposed.   Some 
form of compulsory education has been on the statute books 
since 1917.  We have seen Western countries enforce these laws.  
Most Western countries enjoy almost universal literacy while 
35% of our population is illiterate.  While a robust financial 
incentive programme may not have been possible in 1917, it is 
today.  If we wish to develop further, we must educate each and 
every citizen aged six to fourteen.  

119.	In order to give effect to the constitutional right under 
Article 21A, it is imperative that the Central Government pass 
suitable legislation.  The fine should be suitably increased.  
Imprisonment should be a sentencing option as well.  The 
current patchwork of State/UT legislation on compulsory 
education is insufficient.  Small monetary fines do not go far 
enough to ensure the implementation of Article 21A.

120.		A disclaimer is attached to these  recommendations.  
The recommendations for the enforcement of compulsory 
education are contingent upon the implementation of a financial 
incentive program that would make education viable for the poor.  
The carrot must come before the stick.  If there is no financial 
incentive program in place, the Government cannot expect the 
poorest of the poor to send their children to school. 

121.	The Parliament should criminally penalize those parents 
who receive financial benefits and, despite such payments, send 
their children to work and penalize those employers who 
preclude children from attending school or completing  
homework.  It has become necessary that the Government set a 
realistic target within which it must fully implement Article 21A 
regarding free and compulsory education for the entire country.  
The Government should suitably revise budget allocations for 
education.  The priorities have to be set correctly. The most 
important fundamental right may be Article 21A, which, in the 
larger interest of the nation, must be fully implemented. Without 
Article 21A, the other fundamental rights are effectively rendered 
meaningless.  Education stands above other rights, as one's 
ability to enforce one's fundamental rights flows from one's 
education.  This is ultimately why the judiciary must oversee 
Government spending on free and compulsory education.   

122.	At the same time, spending is an area in which the 
judiciary must not overstep its constitutional mandate.  The 
power of the purse is found in Part V, Chapter II of the 
Constitution, which is dedicated to the Parliament.  (See: Articles 
109 and 117 for "Money Bills.")  Nevertheless, it remains within 
the judiciary's scope to ensure that the fundamental right under 
Article 21A of Part III is upheld.  In M.C. Mehta v. Union of 
India (vehicular pollution) (1998) 6 SCC 63, this Court did not 
ignore the Article 21 right to life when deadly levels of pollution 
put the right at stake. Nor will this Court ignore the Article 21A 
right to education, when a dearth of quality schooling put it in 
jeopardy. The Government's education programmes and 
expenditures, wanting in many respects, are an improvement 
over past performance.  They nearly fall short of the 
constitutional mark.  Lackluster performance in 
primary/secondary schools is caused in part because 
Government places college students on a higher pedestal.  Money 
will not solve all our education woes, but a correction of priorities 
in step with the Constitution's mandate will go a long way. 

7 	Opposition to Compulsory Education

123.	"Compulsory" connotes enforcement.  The Parliament 
rejected an amendment that would have saved parents from 
penal penalties. If education were not compulsory, who checks in 
with parents who have sent their children to work?  If no 
authorities inquire, the message is clear:  We, the State, do not 
care if your child goes to school.  Taking the opposing view, Shri 
G.M. Banatwalla wanted to make sure parents were not 
punished:
"this word 'compulsion' needs to be properly defined.  
The word, 'compulsion' is not to be related to the 
student or the parents.  Parents cannot be penalized 
for being too poor to send their children to school.  
The word, 'compulsion' has to be understood in 
relation to the State and the obligation of the State to 
provide for free education. p. 523." (See: The 
Parliamentary Debates on Article 21A, p. 523, 28 
November 2001 at Vol. 20, No. 6-10)
124.	The Parliament had the opportunity to accept such a 
definition of "compulsory."  But they chose otherwise.  
Amendment number four, moved by Shri G.M. Banatwalla at p. 
548, stated that:
"Provided that in making any law to provide for free 
and compulsory education under this article, the State 
shall not (b) enforce any penal sanctions on a parent 
or guardian."  

125.	Of paramount importance, this Amendment was 
"negatived."  [See p. 548]. Those who wanted a safe-haven from 
penal sanction for parents lost.  From this vote, we know that the 
Parliament intended to allow for future legislation that would 
impose penal sanctions for violations of legislation under Article 
21A.

7 	Conclusion on Free and Compulsory Education

126.	Given that so many children drop out of, or are absent 
from, school before they turn fourteen, "free education" alone 
cannot solve the problem. The current patchwork of laws on 
compulsory education is insufficient. Monetary fines do not go 
far enough to ensure that Article 21A is upheld.

127.	A carrot-and-stick approach appears to be the best way to 
implement Article 21A.  Financial incentive programmes have 
worked well in other countries.  We should follow their lead.  
Once that is done, the Government should strictly enforce 
effective compulsory education laws.  Such a policy is bound to 
pay off.     

	In sum, the Central Government should enact legislation 
that: 
(a) 	provides low-income parents/guardians with 
financial incentives such that they may afford to 
send their children to school; 

(b)	criminally penalizes those who receive financial 
incentives and despite such payment send their 
children to work; 

(c)	penalizes employers who preclude children from 
attending school or completing homework; 

(d) 	the penalty should include imprisonment; the 
aforementioned Bill would serve as an example. 
The State is obligated under Article 21A to 
implement free and compulsory education in toto; 

(e) 	Until we have achieved the object of free and 
compulsory education, the Government should 
continue to increase the education budget; 

(f) 	the Parliament should set a deadline by which 
time free and compulsory education will have 
reached every child.  This must be done within 
six months. 

128.	With regard to (a), the state cannot cite budgetary 
constraints or lack of resources as an excuse for failing to 
provide financial assistance/incentives to poor parents. See 
Hussainara Khatoon (supra), at page 107, para 10. 
129.	Article 21A's reference to "education" must mean 
something. This conclusion is bolstered by the Parliament's 
Statement of Objects and Reasons for Article 21A:
"The Constitution of India in a Directive Principle 
contained in article 45, has made a provision for free 
and compulsory education for all children up to the 
age of fourteen years within ten years of promulgation 
of the Constitution.  We could not achieve this goal 
even after 50 years of adoption of this provision. The 
task of providing education to all children in this age 
group gained momentum after the National Policy of 
Education (NPE) was announced in 1986.  The 
Government of India, in partnership with the State 
Governments, has made strenuous efforts to fulfill this 
mandate and, though significant improvements were 
seen in various educational indicators, the ultimate 
goal of providing universal and quality education still 
remains unfulfilled.  In order to fulfill this goal, it is 
felt that an explicit provision should be made in the 
Part relating to Fundamental Rights of the 
Constitution.  

1.	With a view to making right to free and 
compulsory education a fundamental right, the 
Constitution (Eighty-third Amendment) Bill, 1997 was 
introduced in the Parliament to insert a new article, 
namely, article 21A conferring on all children in the 
age group of 6 to 14 years the right to free and 
compulsory education.  The said Bill was scrutinized 
by the Parliament Standing Committee on Human 
Resource Development and the subject was also dealt 
with in its 165th Report by the Law Commission of 
India.

2.	After taking into consideration the report of the 
Law Commission of India and the recommendations of 
the Standing Committee of the Parliament, the 
proposed amendments in Part III, Part IV and Part IVA 
of the Constitution are being made which are as 
follows 

3.  The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects"  

130.	The Article seeks to usher in "the ultimate goal of providing 
universal and quality education." (emphasis supplied). Implied 
within "education" is the idea that it will be quality in nature. 
Current performance indicates that much improvement needs to 
be made before we qualify "education" with "quality."  Of course, 
for children who are out school, even the best education would 
be irrelevant.  It goes without saying that all children aged six to 
fourteen must attend school and education must be quality in 
nature. Only upon accomplishing both of these goals, can we say 
that we have achieved total compliance with Article 21A.
131.	Though progress has been made, the Parliament's 
observation upon passing Art 21A still applies:  the goal of 
providing universal and quality education " still remains 
unfulfilled."  
3.	Does the 93rd Amendment violate the Basic 
Structure of the Constitution by imposing 
reservation on unaided institutions?  

132. 	Imposing reservation on unaided institutions violates the 
basic structure by obliterating citizens' 19(1)(g) right to carry on 
an occupation.  Unaided entities, whether they are educational 
institutions or private corporations, cannot be regulated out of 
existence when they are providing a public service like education.  
That is what reservation would do.  That is an unreasonable 
restriction. When you do not take a single paisa of public money, 
you cannot be subjected to such restriction.  The 93rd 
Amendment's reference to unaided institutions must be severed.  

133.	No unaided institution filed a writ petition in this case.  Had 
either this Court or respondents had an objection, they could 
have raised it at any time during the proceedings.  We listened to 
the parties for months.  We received voluminous written 
submissions from the parties, yet no objection was made with 
regard to the fact that no unaided institution had filed a writ 
petition.  While we would usually implead a party if we felt their 
presence was necessary to the resolution of the dispute, the facts 
of this case are peculiar.  The best lawyers in the country argued 
the case for both sides, and a brief from an unaided institution 
would not have added much if anything to the substance of the 
arguments.  The Government will likely target unaided 
institutions in the future.  At that time, this Court will have to go 
through this entire exercise de novo to determine if unaided 
institutions should be subject to reservation.  Such an exercise 
would unnecessarily cause further delay.  The fate of lakhs of 
students and thousands of institutions would remain up in the 
air. (See: Minerva Mills Ltd. &amp; Others v. Union of India &amp; 
Others (1980) 3 SCC 625).  Therefore, looking to the 
extraordinary facts, I have decided to proceed with this aspect of 
the matter in the larger public interest.  

134.	Amendments by their very nature are often enabling 
provisions. If they clear the way for future legislation that would 
in fact violate the basic structure, the Court need not wait for a 
potential violation to become an actual one.  It can strike the 
entire amendment ab initio.  The question of potential width was 
resolved in Minerva Mills (supra), paras 38-39.   The Court 
acknowledged that it generally does not anticipate constitutional 
issues before they arise, but it held that circumstances required 
it to act before unconstitutional provisions could be passed 
under the authority of an unconstitutional amendment.  
"38.  But, we find it difficult to uphold the preliminary 
objection because, the question raised by the 
petitioners as regards constitutionality of Sections 4 
and 55 of the 42nd Amendment is not an academic or a 
hypothetical question.  The 42nd Amendment is there 
for anyone to see and by its Sections 4 and 55 
amendments have been made to Articles 31-C and 368 
of the Constitution.  An order has been passed against 
the petitioners under Section 18-A of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951, by which the 
petitioners are aggrieved."  

"39. Besides there are two other relevant 
considerations which must be taken into account 
while dealing with the preliminary objection.  There is 
no constitutional or statutory inhibition against the 
decision of questions before they actually arise for 
consideration.  In view of the importance of the 
question raised and in view of the fact that the 
question has been raised in many a petition, it is 
expedient in the interest of justice to settle the 
true position.  Secondly, what we are dealing with is 
not an ordinary law which may or may not be passed 
so that it could be said that our jurisdiction is being 
invoked on the hypothetical consideration that a law 
may be passed in future which will injure the rights of 
the petitioners. We are dealing with a constitutional 
amendment which has been brought into operation 
which, of its own force, permits the violation of certain 
freedoms through laws passed for certain purposes.  
We, therefore, overrule the preliminary objection and 
proceed to determine the point raised by the 
petitioners."  
						[emphasis added]


There is not one precise definition of the width test, however. The 
test asks if an amendment is so wide that in effect (actual or 
potential), it goes beyond the Parliament's amending power. 
Kesavananda, paras 531-532:  "But that the real consequences 
can be taken into account while judging the width of the power is 
settled.  The Court cannot ignore the consequences to which a 
particular construction can lead " To make such a 
determination, it follows that the Court should ask whether an 
amendment infringes constitutional limitations as opposed to 
those evolved from mere common law.  (See: Nagaraj, para 103). 

135.	As a preliminary matter, I turn to the cases by which the 
basic structure doctrine has been established.  It has been stated 
that, "Kesavananda had propounded the doctrine, the Indira 
Gandhi Election case had upheld it, and Minerva engraved it on 
stone."  (See: Granville Austin, "Working a Democratic 
Constitution", at page 506].   

136.	Kesavananda and its progeny provide that an amendment 
to the Constitution must not alter the Constitution's basic 
structure.  To reach a conclusion regarding a basic structure 
challenge, I employ the following general standard:  an 
amendment alters the basic structure if its actual or potential 
effect would be to damage a facet of the basic structure to such an 
extent that the facet's original identity is compromised.  

137.	To determine if legislation infringes constitutional 
limitations and is thus invalid, we use the two-step effect test 
(also known as the impact or rights test).  Step One requires us 
to first ask if legislation affects a facet of the basic structure.  

If it does, then at Step Two we ask if the effect on the facet 
of the structure is to such an extent that the facet's original 
identity has been altered. Applying the effect test is another way 
of saying that the form of an amendment is irrelevant; it is the 
consequence thereof that matters.  (See: Kesavanda at para 532 
and I.R. Coelho v. State of Tamilnadu (2007) 2 SCC 1 at 
Conclusion (ii) at page 111).  

138.	The terms "abridge" and "abrogate" have been employed by 
this Court to distinguish between acceptable and unacceptable 
legislation. Whether legislation abridges or abrogates is a 
question of degree.  Using these terms is another way of asking 
whether the legislation had such an effect that it changed the 
basic structure of the Constitution.  If legislation merely abridges 
the basic structure, the structure's identity remains.  The 
legislation is upheld.  In this sense, the Parliament may take 
away or destroy fundamental rights by amending the 
Constitution, provided that the basic structure is not altered.  

139.	If it abrogates the basic structure, the structure and thus 
the Constitution lose their identities.  The legislation must be 
struck down.  This is determined on a case-by-case basis by 
applying the effect test (impact/rights tests).  (See: Coehlo). I 
further note that a total deprivation of fundamental rights, even 
in one limited area, may amount to an abrogation of the basic 
structure.  (See: Minerva Mills, para 59). 
7 	Step One:  Does Article 15(5) affect a facet of the 
basic structure?  

140.	In the instant case, Article 15(5) expressly precludes the 
application of Article 19(1)(g).  Whenever reservations are 
implemented under Article 15(5), citizens are stripped of their 
fundamental rights under Article 19(1)(g).  By excluding Article 
19(1)(g), Article 15(5) obviously affects Article 19(1)(g), a facet of 
the basic structure of the Constitution. Step One is therefore 
cleared. What is more, Article 19(1)(g) belongs to the Golden 
Triangle  Articles 14, 19 and 21 are the three fundamental 
rights that stand above the rest.  Writing for the majority in 
Minerva Mills, Justice Chandrachud provides an eloquent 
justification for shielding the Golden Triangle from attack.  To 
achieve a more egalitarian society, individual liberty must be 
protected:
"Para 74 of Minerva Mills:  Three Articles of our 
Constitution, and only three, stand between the 
heaven of freedom into which Tagore wanted his 
country to awake and the abyss of unrestrained 
power. They are Articles 14, 19 and 21. Article 31C 
has removed two sides of that golden triangle which 
affords to the people of this country an assurance that 
the promise held forth by the Preamble will be 
performed by ushering an egalitarian era through the 
discipline of fundamental rights, that is, without 
emasculation of the rights to liberty and equality 
which alone can help preserve the dignity of the 
individual."

141.	The Golden Triangle's significance becomes clear when we 
consider that Government may suspend Article 14 and 19 rights 
in order to implement an emergency.  (See: Articles 358 and 359) 
(prior to the 44th Amendment, all Part III rights could be 
curtailed during emergency; this Amendment precludes the State 
from denying Articles 20 and 21 to citizens during emergency).  
In a sense, democracy is only restored when the Triangle is 
returned to the citizens.  Without the Triangle, democracy is 
impossible:  
"para 63 Every State is goal-oriented and claims to 
strive for securing the welfare of its people. The 
distinction between the different forms of Government 
consists in that a real democracy will endeavour to 
achieve its objectives through the discipline of 
fundamental freedoms like those conferred by Articles 
14 and 19. Those are the most elementary 
freedoms without which a free democracy is 
impossible and which must therefore be preserved 
at all costs. Besides, as observed by Brandies, J., the 
need to protect liberty is the greatest when 
Government's purposes are beneficent. If the 
discipline of Article 14 is withdrawn and if immunity 
from the operation of that article is conferred, not only 
on laws passed by the Parliament but on laws passed 
by the State Legislatures also, the political pressures 
exercised by numerically large groups can tear the 
country asunder by leaving it to the legislature to pick 
and choose favoured areas and favourite classes for 
preferential treatment." 

142.	United States Supreme Court Justice Brandeis' word of 
caution is relevant to today's dispute wherein the Government 
trumpets reservation in higher education as an answer to our 
age-old problems of poverty and caste.  At first blush, it sounds 
as if reservation in higher education would help the backward 
help themselves.  The road out of poverty is paved with 
education.  However, the "devil is the details."  With elementary 
freedom on the line, I must carefully scrutinize those details.  

143.	The right to freedom under Article 19 has been long 
recognized as a natural and inalienable right that belongs to all 
citizens. Indeed, what would Independence mean without it? 
Chief Justice Sikri cites the following passage in Kesavananda 
at para 300:  
"That article (Article 19) enumerates certain freedoms 
under the caption "right to freedom" and deals with 
those great and basic rights which are recognised and 
guaranteed as the natural rights inherent in the status 
of a citizen of a free country." (Per Patanjali Sastri, 
C.J., in State of West Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose 
[1954] S.C.R. 587, 596)."

144.	With fundamental rights in jeopardy, I shall review the 
cases in which the basic structure doctrine has been 
implemented to invalidate constitutional amendments.  By 
looking at these cases synoptically, we get a sense as to how 
much damage the basic structure can withstand before 
crumbling.  In Kesavananda, the second part of Article 31C 
precluded courts from reviewing whether a law under Article 
39(b) or (c) promoted the policy for which it was enacted.  This 
violated the basic structure.  Article 31C was introduced by the 
25th Amendment.  

145.	In Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain &amp; Another (1975) 
Supp SCC 1, the Court struck Article 329A(4) as violative of the 
basic structure.  This provision appropriated the Court's power 
to adjudicate election laws, encroaching on the judiciary in 
violation of separation of powers.  See Justice Matthew's opinion 
at para 325.  It was introduced by the 39th Amendment.  In 
Minerva Mills, the Court held sections 4 and 55 of the 42nd 
Amendment in violation of the basic structure.  Section 4 sought 
to expand 31C such that all laws giving effect to Directive 
Principles, not just those intended to promote Article 39(b) or (c), 
would be immune to an Article 14 or 19 challenge.  Section 55 
would have barred judicial review of constitutional amendments.  

146.	In P. Sambamurthy v. State of A.P. (1987) 1 SCC 362, the 
Court invalidated Article 371-D(5), finding that the Parliament 
had violated the rule of law and consequently the basic 
structure, by removing judicial review from the High Court and 
placing it in the hands of one of the parties  the State 
Government.  In L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (1997) 3 
SCC 261, the Court held that Articles 323A-2D and 323B-3D 
violated the basic structure in that they removed judicial review 
of the High Courts and Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 
and 32, respectively.  These articles were introduced by the 42nd 
Amendment to empower the Parliament or the State Legislatures 
to establish Tribunals for various substantive areas of law:  tax, 
labour, criminal, etc.  

147.	Two broad themes surface from these cases.  When judicial 
review is barred, democracy evaporates.  And when Fundamental 
Rights are at stake, they must be harmonized with, not made 
subject to, the Directive Principles. Sections 4 and 55 of the 42nd 
Amendment were especially egregious violations of the basic 
structure.  Had Section 4 been upheld, citizens' fundamental 
rights would have been at the mercy of one organ of Government.  
"If Governments always could be trusted, there would have been 
no need for Fundamental rights." Mr Palkhivala in oral 
arguments in Kesavananda, quoting from the learned Mr H.M. 
Seervai, who was opposing counsel in that case.  Mr Palkhivala 
was reading from Seervai, H.M., "Fundamental Rights:  A Basic 
Issue," published in three installments in the Times of India, 14, 
15, 16 February 1955. (See: Granville Austin at pages 263-264 
in "Working a Democratic Constitution")

148. 	Government cannot be trusted; that is precisely why we 
divide its powers into separate organs.  If it could be trusted, 
there would be no need for co-equal branches in which power is 
shared.  Separation of powers is an axiom of democracy.  

149.	Had Section 55 of the 42nd Amendment been upheld, the 
basic structure of the Constitution could have been destroyed by 
a single slash.  Future constitutional amendments would not 
have been reviewed. The impugned Amendment looks rather 
mild in comparison to the damage that would have been wrought 
by the 42nd Amendment.  The impugned legislation limits one 
fundamental right in one limited circumstance.  Yet an 
amendment need not be as invidious as the 42nd Amendment for 
us to invalidate it.  If the standard were that high, amendments 
could destroy the basic structure or the essence of the 
Constitution by a thousand slashes. 

150.	Since Kesavananda's time, many amendments have been 
passed and many challenges under the basic structure have 
been made.  This Court has used caution and has refrained from 
using the doctrine, even when it may have been justified.  For 
example, there were grounds for striking the entire 10th Schedule 
as violative of the basic structure in Kihoto Hollohan v 
Zachillhu &amp; Others 1992 Supp (2) SCC 651.  Rather than 
resort to the basic structure, this Court made a narrow ruling on 
procedural grounds.  (See: S.P. Sathe, Judicial Activism in India: 
Transgressing Borders and Enforcing Limits, 2nd Edn., 2002 
(Oxford University Press) pages 92-93). The Court upheld the 
10th Schedule, only severing a paragraph from the same.  I agree 
that an abundance of caution ought to be taken before 
employing the basic structure doctrine.  The violation must truly 
abrogate the basic structure.  Anything short of this standard 
must be upheld  the will of the people, through their elected 
representatives, heard.  

151.	Before making such a determination, it is prudent to briefly 
revisit the rulings of two landmark cases:  P.A. Inamdar &amp; 
Others v. State of Maharashtra &amp; Others, (2005) 6 SCC 537; 
T.M.A. Pai Foundation &amp; Others v. State of Karnataka &amp; 
Others (2002) 8 SCC 481.  In Inamdar (supra), paras 26-27 
(seven-Judge Bench), unaided (minority and non-minority) 
professional institutions filed petitions to determine, inter alia, 
whether the State could impose quotas on unaided (minority and 
non-minority) institutions. A seven-Judge Bench was constituted 
such that Islamic Academy's clarification of Pai could be 
reviewed.  Islamic Academy was a five-Judge Bench. Given that 
Pai was an eleven-Judge Bench, Inamdar could clarify but not 
overrule Pai.    

152.	At para 124, Inamdar held that the State cannot impose 
quotas on unaided (minority and non-minority) institutions.  To 
do so would nationalize seats, contrary to Pai.  (See: Inamdar at 
para 125).  In dictum, Pai suggested that the State could compel 
unaided institutions to admit a reasonable percentage of 
students via reservation.  (Pai, para 68).  Inamdar clarified this 
point, stating that Pai should be read to mean that the State and 
unaided institutions may enter into consensual agreement 
regarding reservation.  (See: Inamdar at para 126). Unaided 
institutions (minority and non-minority) can admit as they 
choose, provided their process is fair, transparent, non-
exploitative and merit-based.  Inamdar stated:
"124: So far as appropriation of quota by the State 
and enforcement of its reservation policy is concerned, 
we do not see much of difference between non-
minority and minority unaided educational 
institutions. We find great force in the submission 
made on behalf of the petitioners that the States have 
no power to insist on seat sharing in the unaided 
private professional educational institutions by fixing 
a quota of seats between the management and the 
State. The State cannot insist on private 
educational institutions which receive no aid 
from the State to implement State's policy on 
reservation for granting admission on lesser 
percentage of marks, i.e. on any criterion except 
merit.
125. As per our understanding, neither in the 
judgment of Pai Foundation nor in the Constitution 
Bench decision in Kerala Education Bill, which was 
approved by Pai Foundation, there is anything which 
would allow the State to regulate or control 
admissions in the unaided professional educational 
institutions so as to compel them to give up a share of 
the available seats to the candidates chosen by the 
State, as if it was filling the seats available to be filled 
up at its discretion in such private institutions. This 
would amount to nationalization of seats which 
has been specifically disapproved in Pai 
Foundation. Such imposition of quota of State 
seats or enforcing reservation policy of the State 
on available seats in unaided professional 
institutions are acts constituting serious 
encroachment on the right and autonomy of 
private professional educational institutions. 

Such appropriation of seats can also not be held 
to be a regulatory measure in the interest of 
minority within the meaning of Article 30(1) or a 
reasonable restriction within the meaning of 
Article 19(6) of the Constitution. Merely because the 
resources of the State in providing professional 
education are limited, private educational institutions, 
which intend to provide better professional education, 
cannot be forced by the State to make admissions 
available on the basis of reservation policy to less 
meritorious candidate. Unaided institutions, as they 
are not deriving any aid from State funds, can 
have their own admissions if fair, transparent, 
non-exploitative and based on merit."

To the extent that Islamic Academy had approved of quotas in 
unaided institutions, a scheme in which the States could fix 
quota for seat sharing between management and the State, 
Islamic was overruled.  [Inamdar at para 130] 

153.	 In T.M.A. Pai Foundation (supra) para 2 (eleven- Judge 
Bench), private educational institutions, aided and unaided, filed 
writ petitions to challenge regulations that impeded their rights. 
They wanted to establish and administer educational 
institutions, unfettered by Government interference. [para 2]. 
Reading Article 29(2) and 30(1) harmoniously, the six-Justice 
majority held that (1) unaided institutions could admit students 
free of Government interference, as long as their admission 
process was transparent and merit-based; (2) minority aided 
institutions may still admit their own students, contingent upon 
admitting a reasonable number of non-minority students per the 
percentage provided by the State Government.   

154.	For our purposes, it is important to note that education 
falls within the meaning of "occupation" under 19(1)(g).  This is 
so because a large number of persons are employed as teachers 
and administrative staff. For them, education is an occupation.  
Pai stated:
"20:  "Article 19(1)(g) employs four expressions, viz., 
profession, occupation, trade and business. Their 
fields may overlap, but each of them does have a 
content of its own. Education is per se regarded as an 
activity that is charitable in nature [See The State of 
Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala,  Education has 
so far not been regarded as a trade or business where 
profit is the motive. Even if there is any doubt about 
whether education is a profession or not, it does 
appear that education will fall within the meaning of 
the expression "occupation". Article 19(1)(g) uses the 
four expressions so as to cover all activities of a citizen 
in respect of which income or profit is generated, and 
which can consequently be regulated under Article 
19(6).

25 The establishment and running of an educational 
institution where a large number of persons are 
employed as teachers or administrative staff, and an 
activity is carried on that results in the imparting of 
knowledge to the students, must necessarily be 
regarded as an occupation, even if there is no 
element of profit generation. It is difficult to 
comprehended that education, per se, will not fall 
under any of the four expressions in Article 19(1)(g). 
"Occupation" would be an activity of a person 
undertaken as a means of livelihood or a mission in 
life. ..."
                                                  [emphasis added]

155. Stripping private unaided institutions of their right to select 
students would be unreasonable:
"para  40: Any system of student selection would be 
unreasonable if it deprives the private unaided 
institution of the right of rational selection, which it 
devised for itself, subject to the minimum qualification 
that may be prescribed and to some system of 
computing the equivalence between different kinds of 
qualifications, like a common entrance test. Such a 
system of selection can involve both written and oral 
tests for selection, based on principle of fairness."

156.	Like Article 15(5) in the instant case, Unni Krishnan 
effectively nationalized education. Pai overturned Unni 
Krishnan.  (See: para 45).  
"38:  The scheme in Unni Krishnan's case has the 
effect of nationalizing education in respect of 
important features, viz., the right of a private unaided 
institution to give admission and to fix the fee. By 
framing this scheme, which has led to the State 
Governments legislating in conformity with the 
scheme the private institutions are undistinguishable 
from the Government institutions; curtailing all the 
essential features of the right of administration of a 
private unaided educational institution can neither be 
called fair or reasonable."

157.	Pai traces the autonomy of institutions back to 
Chitralekha and Rajendran.  The proposition is simple:  he 
who funds or runs the institution holds the power to select 
students. The State cannot ask these institutions to abridge this 
right in exchange for affiliation/recognition.  The relevant 
paragraphs are reproduced hereunder:
"36: The private unaided educational institutions 
impart education, and that cannot be the reason to 
take away their choice in matters, inter alia, of 
selection of students and fixation of fees. Affiliation 
and recognition has to be available to every institution 
that fulfills the conditions for grant of such affiliation 
and recognition. The private institutions are right in 
submitting that it is not open to the Court to insist 
that statutory authorities should impose the terms of 
the scheme as a condition for grant of affiliation or 
recognition; this completely destroys the institutional 
autonomy and the very objective of establishment of 
the institution.

42. In R. Chitralekha and Anr. v. State of Mysore and 
Ors.[citation omitted], while considering the validity of 
a viva-voce test for admission to a Government 
medical college, it was observed at page 380 that 
colleges run by the Government, having regard to 
financial commitments and other relevant 
considerations, would only admit a specific number of 
students. It had devised a method for screening the 
applicants for admission. While upholding the order so 
issued, it was observed that "once it is conceded, and it 
is not disputed before us, that the State Government 
can run medical and engineering colleges, it cannot be 
denied the power to admit such qualified students as 
pass the reasonable tests laid down by it. This is a 
power which every private owner of a College will have, 
and the Government which runs its own Colleges 
cannot be denied that power." (italics  added by Pai; 
underscore is mine).

43. Again, in Minor P. Rajendran v. State of Madras 
and Ors  , it was observed at page 795 that "so far 
as admission is concerned, it has to be made by those 
who are in control of the Colleges, and in this case the 
Government, because the medical colleges are 
Government colleges affiliated to the University. In 
these circumstances, the Government was entitled to 
frame rules for admission to medical colleges controlled 
by it subject to the rules of the university as to eligibility 
and qualifications." The aforesaid observations clearly 
underscore the right of the colleges to frame rules for 
admission and to admit students. The only 
requirement or control is that the rules for admission 
must be subject to the rules of the university as to 
eligibility and qualifications. The Court did not say that 
the university could provide the manner in which the 
students were to be selected.

61. In the case of unaided private schools, maximum 
autonomy has to be with the management with regard 
to administration, including the right of appointment, 
disciplinary powers, admission of students and the 
fees to be charged."

158.	Unaided institutions may admit students of their choice, 
subject to an objective and rational procedure of selection.  They 
might admit a small percentage of students belonging to the 
weaker sections of the society by granting those sections 
freeships or scholarships, if not granted by the Government. 
[See: Pai at para 53]. Given a transparent and reasonable 
selection process, it is up to the institution to define "merit" 
according to its own values.  Pai stated:
"65. The reputation of an educational institution is 
established by the quality of its faculty and students, 
and the educational and other facilities that the 
colleges has to offer. The private educational 
institutions have a personality of their own, and in 
order to maintain their atmosphere and traditions, it 
is but necessary that they must have the right to 
choose and select the students who can be admitted to 
their courses of studies. If is for this reason that in the 
St. Stephen's College case, this Court upheld the 
scheme whereby a cut-off percentage was fixed for 
admission, after which the students were interviewed 
and thereafter selected. While an educational 
institution cannot grant admission on its whims and 
fancies, and must follow some identifiable or 
reasonable methodology of admitting the students, 
any scheme, rule or regulation that does not give the 
institution the right to reject candidates who might 
otherwise be qualified according to say their 
performance in an entrance test, would be an 
unreasonable restriction under Article 19(6), though 
appropriate guidelines/modalities can be prescribed 
for holding the entrance test a fair manner. Even when 
students are required to be selected on the basis of 
merit, the ultimate decision to grant admission to the 
students who have otherwise qualified for the grant of 
admission must be left with the educational 
institution concerned. However, when the institution 
rejects such students, such rejection must not be 
whimsical or for extraneous reasons."

159.	The Court distinguishes between reasonable and 
unreasonable regulations by asking which functions lie at the 
heart of an institution's autonomy.  Regulations that strike at the 
core of autonomy are unreasonable.  For example, prescribing 
minimum qualifications for teachers is a reasonable regulation; 
actually selecting the teachers is not.  
"55. But the essence of a private educational 
institution is the autonomy that the institution must 
have in its management and administration. There, 
necessarily, has to be a difference in the 
administration of private unaided institutions and 
the Government-aided institutions. Whereas in the 
latter case, the Government will have greater say in 
the administration, including admissions and fixing 
of fees, in the case of private unaided institutions, 
maximum autonomy in the day-to-day 
administration has to be with the private unaided 
institutions. Bureaucratic or Governmental 
interference in the administration of such an 
institution will undermine its independence. While 
an educational institution is not a business, in order 
to examine the degree of independence that can be 
given to a recognized educational institution, like any 
private entity that does not seek aid or assistance 
from the Government, and that exists by virtue of the 
funds generated by it, including its loans or 
borrowings, it is important to note that the essential 
ingredients of the management of the private 
institution include the recruiting students and staff, 
and the quantum of fee that is to be charged."

160.	The same argument was framed in similar terms in St. 
Stephen's College v. University of Delhi, 1992 (1) SCC 558.  
In that case, the Court distinguished regulations based on 
whether they directly or indirectly affected management.  Those 
that indirectly affected management were reasonable; those that 
directly affected the management of the institution were not.  
[Pai at para 125].  

161.	In St. Stephen's, this Court referred to the earlier 
decisions, and with regard to Article 30(1) observed at page 596, 
paragraph 54, as follows:
" But the standards of education are not a part of 
the management as such. The standard concerns the 
body politic and is governed by considerations of the 
advancement of the country and its people. Such 
regulations do not bear directly upon management 
although they may indirectly affect it. The State, 
therefore has the right to regulate the standard of 
education and allied matters." 

162.	Once a private institution (non-minority) takes aid, it is 
subject to (1) reservation and (2) regulation of administration and 
maintenance of the institution. Pai stated:
"71: "While giving aid to professional institutions, it 
would be permissible for the authority giving aid to 
prescribe by rules or regulations, the conditions on 
the basis of which admission will be granted to 
different aided colleges by virtue of merit, coupled with 
the reservation policy of the state. 

72: "Once aid is granted to a private professional 
educational institution, the Government or the state 
agency, as a condition of the grant of aid, can put 
fetters on the freedom in the matter of administration 
and management of the institution. The state, which 
gives aid to an educational institution, can impose 
such conditions as are necessary for the proper 
maintenance of the high standards of education as the 
financial burden is shared by the state. "

163.	I now query if the Parliament may subject Article 19(1)(g) to 
Article 15(5), when this Court has held that reservation in 
unaided institutions is an unreasonable restriction that cannot 
be saved by Article 19(6).

164.	I answer this question in the affirmative.  The structure of 
our Constitution permits fundamental rights, and even the 
Golden Triangle of Articles 14, 19 and 21, to be abridged in 
limited circumstances.  To say that subjecting Articles 19(1)(g) to 
15(5) violates the basic structure per se is to ignore the examples 
in which the most fundamental of rights is limited.  Article 16(4) 
expressly limits the right to formal equality in 16(1), a specific 
facet of Article 14.  In this light, Article 16(4) impliedly limits the 
general right to formal equality in Article 14.  The right to equality 
is expressed in the negative in 15(1): the State shall not 
discriminate based on religion, race, caste, etc.  In other words, 
the State shall treat citizens of different religions, races and 
castes equally.  Like Article 16(4), Article 15(4) limits 15(1) -- 
another facet of Article 14 formal equality -- such that egalitarian 
equality may be pursued.  Generally speaking, Articles 15(3) and 
(4) and 16(4) allow the State to impose affirmative action 
programs on the public sector.  Such provisions necessarily limit 
the right to formal equality.   If the right to equality, considered 
by some as a basic postulate of the Constitution, has been 
limited, a fortiori Article 19(1)(g) can be too.  

165.	Along these lines, I could turn to Articles 31A, 31B and 31C 
for further support.  Those Articles exclude challenges under 
Articles 14 and 19.  In agreement with Dr. Dhavan's submission, 
I decline to rely on Articles 31A, 31B and 31C for support.  As 
explained in Minerva Mills, the Court had previously upheld 
Article 31A out of concern for stare decisis.  The Court never 
approved of the exclusion of Articles 14 and 19 on a principled 
basis.  Nor did it make a ruling as to whether the exclusion 
violated the basic structure. (See: para  71-72 of Minerva Mills.  
See also para 43 of Waman Rao, (1981) 2 SCC 362).     

166.	   A basic structure challenge becomes an issue of 
institutional competence.  Is it for the legislature to decide what 
is a reasonable restriction under 19(1)(g) read with 19(6)?  Or is 
it for the judiciary?  It is well established that the Parliament, 
expressing the will of the people, may enact amendments to 
overrule a judgment of this Court.  The First Parliament added 
Article 15(4) to the Constitution to overrule State of Madras v. 
Champakam Dorairajan, AIR 1951 SC 226.  Other examples 
include the 77th Amendment, which overruled Sawhney I by 
adding Article 16(4-A); the 81st Amendment further overruled 
Sawhney I  by adding Art 16 (4-B); the 82nd Amendment 
overruled S. Vinod Kumar &amp; Another v. Union of India &amp; 
Another (1996) 6 SCC 580 by amending Article 335; and the 
85th Amendment overruled Virpal Singh Chauhann and Ajit 
Singh I by amending Article 16(4-A), (1995) 6 SCC 684 and 
(1996) 2 SCC 715, respectively.  Nevertheless, the duty to 
interpret the content of our fundamental rights has been left to 
the Courts.  "The important point to be noted is that the content 
of a right is defined by the Courts.  The final word on the content 
of the right is of this Court." (Nagaraj at para 21). (emphasis 
added).  While the Parliament may amend the Constitution, it 
cannot alter the Constitution's basic structure.  (See: 
Kesavananda, Indira Nehru Gandhi (Election Case), Minerva 
Mills, Sambamurthy, L. Chandra Kumar and Coelho).

7 	Step Two:  Does Article 15(5) affect Article 
19(1)(g) to such an extent that Article 19(1)(g)'s 
original identity has been altered?

167.	In other words, does Art 15(5) in effect merely abridge or 
completely abrogate Article 19(1)(g).  If the former, 15(5) stands.  
If the latter, it falls.  As noted above, Coelho directs me to apply 
the impact/rights test to determine whether the basic structure 
has been violated. [See Coehlo at Conclusion (ii) at page 111]. 
Thus, my query is whether to consider the impact on the entire 
constitutional framework, or to examine the effect on citizens 
engaged in unaided education as an occupation.  I think it is the 
latter.  I am not concerned here with those engaged in education 
in aided institutions.  One is naturally subject to greater 
regulation when one relies on Government funding.  (See: 
Pai/Inamdar).  Individual liberty and freedom, as protected by 
the Golden Triangle, must carry greater weight for those who set 
off on their own and refuse Government money.  
168. This brings me to the question as to how large I should 
draw the circle when I ask who is affected by reservation in 
unaided institutions. Justice Chandrachud provides that "[a] 
total deprivation of fundamental rights, even in a limited area, 
can amount to abrogation of fundamental right just as a partial 
deprivation in every area can."  (See: Minerva Mills, para  59).  

169.	Freedom under Article 19 belongs to individual citizens.  
Article 19(1)(g) provides that "all citizens shall have the right to 
practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or 
business."   The reference to "all citizens" means that each and 
every individual citizen possesses Article 19 rights.  For the 
impugned legislation to fall, it need not touch every sphere of 
society.  If even one individual's freedom has been curtailed, this 
Court is duty bound to entertain his or her claim. It is he or she 
who possesses the Article 19(1)(g) right to carry on an 
occupation.  

170.	  If 15(5) were implemented, the educator in unaided 
institutions would still have students to educate. I use 
"educator" in the broadest sense of the term and include 
teachers, professors, lecturers, faculty, staff, administrators and 
those who finance institutions.  Without one of the 
aforementioned, the institution cannot function properly.

171.	Though affected by reservation, the educator still has a job.  
His occupation remains intact.   Students will come.  Classes will 
commence.  Marks will be distributed.  The greatest impact on 
the educator is that neither he nor his institution will choose 
whom to teach. 

172.	Almost half of the time (49.5%), the State would decide for 
them. Selecting students or employees goes to the heart of an 
organization's autonomy.  The essence of an unaided educational 
institution is the freedom to manage its affairs, according to Pai 
at paragraph 55.  That is, " the essential ingredients of the 
management of the private institution include the recruiting [of] 
students and staff  ."    The same argument was framed in 
similar terms (at para 54) in St. Stephen's College (regulations 
imposing standards of education upheld, because they " do not 
bear directly upon management although they may indirectly 
affect it ").  This Court has stated in Pai as clarified by 
Inamdar that subjecting unaided institutions is an 
unreasonable restriction.  As noted, Article 19(6) provides no safe 
haven for reservations.  

173.	  The Government-imposed selection of students in turn 
has wide-ranging consequences for unaided institutions and 
their educators.  I am required to examine the effect of the 
impugned Amendment. At least four problems will likely arise:  
(1) 	academic standards suffer; 
(2) 	attracting and retaining good faculty becomes 
more difficult; 

(3) 	the incentive to establish a first rate unaided 
institution is diminished; 

(4) 	and ultimately the global reputation of our 
unaided institutions is severely compromised.  

174.	First, once the State tells them whom to teach, standards of 
excellence will suffer.  This is because those institutions will no 
longer be able to admit the highest-scoring students.  As good as 
some of our institutions are, they do not teach blank slates.  The 
best universities are the best, in part, because they attract the 
best students.  The same can be said for almost any 
organization.  In the case of higher education, the universities 
that admit the best will likely churn out the best.  The precise 
extent to which the university made the best so good cannot be 
qualified.  The point is that universities alone cannot produce 
qualified job candidates.  Forced to admit students with lower 
marks, the university's final product will not be as strong. Once 
the creamy is excluded, cut-off marks would likely drop 
considerably in order to fill the 27% quota for non creamy layer 
OBCs.  When the creamy layer is not removed, as in the case of 
Tamil Nadu, the difference in cut off marks for the general and 
backward categories may be insignificant.  (See para  408 of 
Sawhney I).  Of course, the extent to which standards of 
excellence would suffer would vary by institution.  As I mention 
below, I urge the Government to set OBC cut off marks no lower 
than 10 marks below that of the general category.  This is only a 
recommendation,  however.  It may never be adopted.

175.	Second, reservations weaken the incentive to establish 
unaided institutions:  if the State usurps the right to select 
students, would one still spend the time and money to establish 
an unaided institution?  The question is all the more relevant 
today.  Counsel for petitioners posit that tomorrow's knowledge 
economy requires a well-educated populace. "Well-educated" 
does not imply a string of degrees from less than taxing 
institutions.  Rather, it means that one will possess the skills, 
knowledge and creativity to compete globally.  Our unaided 
institutions must remain places where these traits are refined. 

176.	Third, those inclined to teach the brightest students have 
even less of a reason to leave private sector jobs for the teaching 
profession or to join the profession in the first place.  "Brightest" 
would come with an asterisk.  They would be the brightest 
available under the Government's reservation scheme.  These 
potential teachers may ask themselves:  how will I teach a class 
in which half the students are advanced relative to the other 
half?  In many institutions, the shortage of top-rate faculty will 
only get worse.  Fourth, reservations may have a negative impact 
on students seeking employment in the burgeoning knowledge 
economy.  Recruiters have begun to trickle into campuses. They 
hail from domestic as well as international entities, and they too 
may take note of reservations in unaided institutions.  The effect 
on educators, from the top down, would be felt.  For them, little 
more than a semblance of occupation would remain. 

177.	Given the dramatic effect that reservations would have on 
educators, the unaided institutions in which they teach and, 
consequently, society as a whole, Article 19(1)(g) has been more 
than abridged.  When education is effectively nationalized, 
freedom stands obliterated. The identity of the Constitution is 
altered when unreasonable restrictions make a fundamental 
right meaningless. The 93rd Amendment's imposition of 
reservation on unaided institutions has abrogated Article 
19(1)(g), a basic feature of the Constitution, in violation of our 
Constitution's basic structure.  Therefore, I
sever the 93rd Amendment's reference to "unaided" institutions 
as ultra vires of the Constitution.  

178.	The case law on severability asks the following question: 
had the Parliament known its provision would be severed would 
it still have passed the rest of the legislation? (See: R.M.D. 
Chamarbaugwalla (supra)).  

179.	At page 943 of R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla (supra), the 
Court relied in part on The State of Bombay &amp; Another v. F.N. 
Balsara (1951) SCR 682, where the question at issue was 
whether the Bombay Prohibition Act was valid: 
Sections 12 and 13 of the Act imposed restrictions on 
the possession, consumption and sale of liquor, which 
had been defined in s. 2(24) of the Act as including "(a) 
spirits of wine, methylated spirits, wine, beer, toddy 
and all liquids consisting of or containing alcohol, and 
(b) any other intoxicating substance which the 
Provincial Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, declare to be liquor for the purposes 
of this Act".  Certain medicinal and toilet preparations 
had been declared liquor by notification issued by the 
Government under s. 2(24)(b).  The Act was attacked 
in its entirety as violative of the rights protected by 
Art. 19(1)(f). But this Court held that the impugned 
provisions were unreasonable and therefore void in so 
far as medicinal and toilet preparations were 
concerned, but valid as to the rest.  Then, the 
contention was raised that "as the law purports to 
authorise the imposition of a restriction on a 
fundamental right in language wide enough to cover 
restrictions both within and without the limits of 
constitutionally permissible legislative action affecting 
such right, it is not possible to uphold it even so far as 
it may be applied within the constitutional limits, as it 
is not severable".  In rejecting this contention, the 
Court observed:

'These items being thus treated 
separately by the legislature itself and being 
severable, and it is not being contended, in 
view of the directive principles of State 
policy regarding prohibition, that the 
restrictions imposed upon the right to 
possess or sell or buy or consume or use 
those categories of properties are 
unreasonable, the impugned sections must 
be held valid so far as these categories are 
concerned.'

This decision is clear authority that the 
principle of severability is applicable even 
when Act's invalidity arises by reason of its 
contravention of constitutional limitations."

180.	At page 944, the court in R.M.D. Chamarbaugwalla  
sought guidance from American case law on severability:
"In discussing the effect of a severability clause, 
Brandies, J. observed in Dorchy v. State of Kansas 
(1924) 264 US 286 that it "provides a rule of 
construction, which may sometimes aid in 
determining that intent.  But it is an aid merely; not 
an inexorable command".  The weight to be attached 
to a classification of subjects made in the statute itself 
cannot, in our opinion, be greater than that of a 
severability clause."

181. The court in R.M.D Chambarbaugwalla went on to cite 
Patanjali Sastri, C.J., in The State of Bombay &amp; Another v. 
The United Motors (India) Ltd. &amp; Others (1953) SCR 1069: 
"dealing with the contention that a law authorizing the 
imposition of a tax on sales must be declared to be 
wholly void because it was bad in part as 
transgressing constitutional limits observed:

'It is a sound rule to extend severability to 
include separability in enforcement in such cases, and 
we are of opinion that the principle should be applied 
in dealing with taxing statutes in this country.'"

182. Here, I believe the Parliament would have gone forward 
without unaided institutions.  While some Members of  
Parliament sought to overrule Pai and Inamdar, the 
Parliament's actions speak louder than its words.  Once it had 
passed Article 15(5), it limited itself to imposing greater 
reservations on aided institutions. Had unaided institutions been 
the Parliament's priority, it could have included them in the 
Reservation Act.  It seems that the Parliament's intent is to pass 
as much reservation as possible. That would explain why it has 
gone forward with 27% reservation for OBCs without confirming 
that at least 27% of the population is OBC. For these reasons, I 
conclude that had the Parliament known that unaided 
institutions were going to be severed, it would have nevertheless 
carried out its reservation scheme for aided institutions. 

4.	The Casteless and Classless Society versus 
Caste-based Reservation:

183.	The caste system is peculiar to this country.   Perhaps 
the entire society has been divided on the basis of caste.  This 
social problem can be compared to some extent with that of 
American society.  In the U.S., the problem of racial 
discrimination has existed for centuries. The cases of 
affirmative action decided in the United States are relevant. 
They show us how that society has dealt with the problem of 
racial discrimination. At the outset, I would like to make it 
clear that decisions of foreign countries are not binding on 
Indian courts.  Indian Courts have not adopted American 
standards of review.  But the judgments delivered by U.S. 
courts on affirmative action have great persuasive value and 
they may provide broad guidelines as to how we should tackle 
our prevailing condition.  A large number of English laws have 
been inherited by India and America.  English and American 
cases are frequently cited by our courts.  We need to keep our 
window open and permit the light of knowledge to enter from 
any source.  In this light, I shall refer to some US decisions.

7 	Affirmative Action cases and standards of review 
from the United States:

184.	In 1978, Regents of the University of California v. 
Bakke put an end to reservation ("quotas") in education 
(reserving 16 out of 100 seats for minorities in medical school 
deemed unconstitutional). (438 U.S. 265).  Justice Powell's 
concurring judgment is considered the key opinion in the case.

185.	Justice Powell concluded that diversity was a compelling 
State interest that could withstand strict scrutiny. Relying on 
Bakke, the court later reaffirmed preferential treatment in 
college admissions as a means to ensure diversity in the 
classroom  racial diversity being just one among many types of 
diversity ("overcoming personal adversity and family hardship" 
was another form of diversity), (See: Grutter v. Bollinger, 539 
U. S. 306, 338 (2003)). The Grutter Case insisted that 
universities make an individualized evaluation of a student 
seeking admission, rather than one that mechanically accepted 
or rejected students on the basis of race.  (Grutter at 337).  Such 
an evaluation would ensure that race was only considered as one 
type of diversity, rather than a pretext for achieving racial 
balance.  Quotas could not be covertly installed in the name of 
diversity.  This reasoning led the court to strike down an 
admission scheme that automatically assigned more points to 
minority students than to residents of the State or to athletes, for 
example.  (Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244, 270). 

186.	Justice O'Conner for the majority in Grutter came to a very 
significant conclusion. She suggested that there was time limit 
on preferential treatment for certain races as a means of 
promoting diversity.  Justice O'Connor stated: "we expect that 25 
years from now, the use of racial preferences will no longer be 
necessary to further the interest approved today."

187.	In Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle 
School District No.1 et al, reported in 168 Lawyers Ed. 2d 508 
&amp; 517 (2007), school districts used a student's race to assign 
that student to a particular school within the district.  In Seattle, 
this was done to achieve racial balance amongst the district's 
schools.   One school should not be overwhelmingly white, 
another all non-white.  Unlike the system approved in Grutter, 
race was not just one among many types of diversity that was 
considered by the district in assigning students.  Seattle at 525.  
Instead, it was, at times, the decisive factor. The court held the 
programmes unconstitutional. Chief Justice Roberts summed up 
the plurality's view on racial classifications:  "the way to stop 
discrimination on the basis of race is to stop discriminating on 
the basis of race."

188.	This was far from a complete victory for the plurality.  In his 
concurring opinion, Justice Kennedy found the programmes 
unconstitutional.  However, he would not go so far as to treat all 
racial balancing as per se unconstitutional.  He considered the 
plurality opinion to represent " an all-too-unyielding insistence 
that race cannot be a factor in instances, when, in [his] view, it 
may be taken into account." (Seattle at 565).

189.	Justice Kennedy found that schools have a compelling 
interest to prevent racial isolation or achieve a diverse student 
population. (Seattle at 572).   Like Justice Powell's concurring 
opinion in Bakke, Justice Kennedy's concurring opinion leaves 
the door open for further use of racial classification for so-called 
benign purposes in school admissions.   

190.	More important than any one case are the standards by 
which the court scrutinized discriminatory legislation. Of course, 
Indian courts have not accepted the principles of narrow 
tailoring and strict scrutiny. Nevertheless, we should seek 
guidance from any corner and permit the light from any quarter. 

191.	Whenever legislation is challenged as unconstitutional, 
courts must ask themselves how much deference they will give to 
the legislature. The answer is that it depends on the nature of 
the impugned legislation.  The United States Supreme Court has 
evolved three standards of review for Government action that 
treats different people differently.  The first is the rational basis 
standard. When the classification is rationally related to any 
legitimate Government purpose, the court defers to the State and 
upholds the classification.  This is the most deferential of the 
three standards. The second standard is intermediate scrutiny, 
which is less deferential to Government. Here, the court asks 
whether the classification is substantially related to any 
important Government purpose.  The third and highest level of 
review is known as strict scrutiny, whereby the court requires 
that the classification are narrowly tailored to a compelling state 
interest. Strict scrutiny test is the least deferential to 
Government. 

192.	Of the classifications on which there is case law, the one 
that most closely resembles caste is race.  This is because both 
are immutable traits.  They are used by the powerful, or those 
seeking power, to justify oppression. Racism and casteism have 
long haunted both Nations.  In the United States, race raises red 
flags.  It is often, though not always, reviewed under strict 
scrutiny:  "Government action dividing people by race is 
inherently suspect because such classifications promote 'notions 
of racial inferiority and lead to a politics of racial hostility,' 
(Croson at 102 L. Ed. 2d 854) and "racial classifications are 
simply too pernicious to permit any but the most exact 
connection between the justification and the classification."  
(Gratz v. Bollinger, 539 U.S. 244, 270 (quoting J. Stevens' 
dissent in Fullilove v. Klutznick, 448 U.S. 448, 537)).  

193.	Legislation whose text does not classify based on race is 
considered facially neutral.  When facially neutral legislation has 
a disproportionate impact on a particular race, American courts 
ask whether it was passed with an intention to discriminate.  If 
no intention is found, the rational basis test applies. [See: 
Hernandez v New York, 500 U.S. 352 (1991) (quoting from 
Arlington Heights v. Metropolitan Housing Development 
Corp., 429 U.S. 252, 264-265 (1977)]:
"A court addressing this issue must keep in mind the 
fundamental principle that "official action will not be 
held unconstitutional solely because it results in a 
racially disproportionate impact. . . . Proof of racially 
discriminatory intent or purpose is required to show a 
violation of the Equal Protection Clause."  

See also Washington v. Davis, 426 U.S. 229, 239 (1976).  The 
exception to this rule is Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 U.S. 356 
(1886), where extreme disproportionate impact warranted greater 
scrutiny.  Where there is disproportionate impact and 
discriminatory intention, then even facially neutral legislation 
triggers strict scrutiny. However, in this framework, affirmative 
action classifies on the face of legislation and automatically gets 
strict scrutiny treatment.  
194.	As I have observed, American courts carefully review  racial 
classifications.   Given that the 93rd Amendment on its face 
discriminates against general category students, we should give 
it careful scrutiny. The Article 14 right to formal equality 
deserves as much.  If 49.5% caste-based reservation was upheld 
in Sawhney I for Government employment, it follows that 49.5% 
caste-based reservation is permitted in aided educational 
institutions.  While I compelled by Sawhney I to hold that the 
impugned legislation passes careful scrutiny with respect to 
reservation in aided institutions, its implementation is 
contingent upon the directions given in this opinion.  

7   The Framers' ultimate goal: the Classless and 
Casteless society: 

195.	Did the original Framers intend to provide caste-based 
reservation in education to the lower classes?  No, the original 
Framers did not.  Soon after the Constitution was adopted, the 
very same Framers acted quickly to permit reservation for 
SC/ST/SEBCs in education by adding Art 15(4), vide the First 
Amendment, to the Constitution.  In doing so, they deviated from 
their own goal  the casteless society would have to wait.  In 
Sawhney I, the Court upheld this decision and bound us to a 
certain degree on this point.  I have no choice but to uphold the 
impugned legislation by which the Government may still identify 
SEBCs, in part, by using caste.   

196.	Caste-based reservation was initially a temporary measure 
that was to only last for ten years.  The original Framers 
considered caste-based reservation a necessary evil.  Thus, they 
limited it in time.  Extending this time limit has only exacerbated 
casteism.  

197.	The Parliamentary Debates clearly reflect that the ultimate 
aim of reservation was a casteless and classless society for India.  
To this end, reservation should only be given for a specific period 
of time.  If these reservations or benefits have to continue 
perpetually, then the basic goal of achieving casteless and 
classless society would never be accomplished.   

198.	The need for caste-based reservation has "worn out" over 
time.  Evidence for the proposition that caste is no longer a valid 
determinant of one's ability to move up in society is strong.  More 
than the way society judges you based on caste, the relevant 
question is whether caste precludes you from rising.  If caste 
doesn't, then what does?  The answer is simple:  money.  

199.	Income is a much better determinant of educational 
achievement than caste.  The table below was derived from the 
Reproductive Child and Health Survey, 2002-2004 (600,000 
households surveyed).  
Average years of schooling:
			    SC		OBC	       Upper caste Hindu
Poorest Rural Quintile     1.6         1.7         2.2  
Richest Rural Quintile     5.1         5.5         6.1  

For the upper caste, caste barely helps.  These numbers 
indicate that it is one's income, not caste, that makes a real 
difference in determining how much schooling one completes.  
Therefore, if income be the bar to education, economic criteria 
should be the means by which we identify beneficiaries of special 
provisions under Article 15(5).
7  	No original intent to provide caste-based quotas 
in education: 

200.	As drafters, the original Framers were prolific.  They made 
our Constitution the world's longest  removing as many doubts 
as possible and in that way limiting the Court's role.  The 
Constitution contains a number of Articles that reserve seats for 
various groups.  The original Framers, however, imposed various 
limitations on reservation.  These limitations provide insight into 
the original Framers' compromise between formal and 
substantial/egalitarian equality.  

201.	Reservation is only provided for certain groups (SC, ST and 
backward classes) in certain areas of the public sector. (See: 
Article 16(4) (reservation of posts in Government service for 
backward classes), Article 330 (reservation of seats for SC and ST 
in the Lok Sabha) and Article 332 (reservation of seats for SC and 
ST in Legislative Assemblies of the States)).

202.	Dr Ambedkar stated that "the report of the Minorities 
Committee provided that all minorities should have two benefits 
or privileges, namely representation in the legislatures and 
representation in the services."  (emphasis added) (See: CAD, 26 
August 1949, vol. 9, p. 702).  Given this limitation, we must take 
extra caution when reviewing the constitutionality of adding 
additional benefits.  

203.	Article 334 fixed a 10-year time limit on the legislative 
reservations provided in Articles 330 and 332. In the discussion 
regarding draft Article 292, Sardar Hukam Singh said, "we are 
accepting this reservation of seats [in legislative bodies] as an 
unavoidable evil for the present, thought it is only for the 
Scheduled Castes and scheduled tribes."  (See: p. 645, 
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 9, 24 August 1949).  

204.	Shri Singh's comment sums up the limitations on legislative 
reservation.  OBC/SEBCs were excluded, and reservations were 
limited in time.  Unlike the legislative reservations, Article 16(4) 
contains no fixed time limit.  It does, however, preclude the State 
from making reservations in Government service if the backward 
classes are adequately represented.   The idea is that, at some 
point in time, the backward classes would no longer need 
reservations.  

205.	In discussing draft Article 10 (Article 16(4) of the 
Constitution), Pandit Hirday Nath Kunzru stated: 
"We are all aware that when the Report of the 
Minorities Committee was considered by the House, 
the entire House was anxious that reservations of 
whatever kind should be done away with as quickly 
as possible.  whatever protection might be 
considered necessary now, should be granted 
temporarily only, so that the population of the county 
might become fully integrated, and no community or 
class might be tempted to claim special advantage for 
itself."  (CAD Vol.7 dated 30th  November 1948, p. 
681)"
(emphasis supplied) 

Instead of moving to remove reservations, the Parliament has 
gone the other way by extending time limits and adding 
beneficiaries.  Article 15(5) is just the latest example.  

206.	While the original Framers went out of their way to put 
SC/ST in the Parliament and State Assemblies and 
SC/ST/backward classes in Government service, they did not 
reserve a single classroom seat. Instead, Article 29(2) prohibited 
caste-based discrimination in admissions, and Article 15(2) 
prohibited caste-based discrimination in general.  Education was 
to remain reservation-free. 
207.	When preferential treatment was given in regard to 
education, it was limited to educational grants.  There was no 
question of doling out reservations for special groups.  Article 
337 provided educational grants to Anglo-Indian schools for the 
benefit of that community.  In the spirit of conciliation, the 
original Framers allowed the grants that were already going to 
those schools to continue for 10 years.  (See: p 936-941 of 
Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 8 1949).  

208.	Rather than advocate for reservation, the original Framers 
preferred free/compulsory education and scholarships. In the 
debate on Draft Article 294, Shri Brajeshwar Prasad stated that 
reservation in legislative bodies would fail to uplift SC/ST.  
Instead, he suggested that:
"it should be laid down clearly in express terms that  
free education shall be imparted to them.  [and] for 
the tribals and Harijans provision must be made in 
the constitution that free agricultural lands should be 
given to them.  If we cannot give any one of these, I am 
quite clear in my own mind that by giving them a few 
seats here and there, their economic condition and 
their educational level will in no way be improved.   
(CAD, Vol. 9, 24 August 1948, pages 663-664)"                            
(emphasis supplied)
209. Shri Prasad's comments are relevant because he recognizes 
the limited effect of reservation.  Rather than reserve seats for a 
few, he advocated for free education for all. 

210.	In the debate regarding Article 15 of the Constitution, Syed 
Abdur Rouf summed up the essence of the provision: "The 
intention of this article is to prohibit discrimination against 
citizens."  (See: p. 650 of CAD, Vol.7, 29 Nov 1948).  This 
intention was only qualified for women and children.  In fact, the 
original Framers rejected an amendment that would have 
watered down Article 15's prohibition against discrimination.  
Prof. K. T. Shah sought special protection for SC/ST.  He wanted 
to ensure that Article 15 would allow SC/ST to benefit from 
affirmative action.  To this end, he introduced an amendment 
that would have altered 15(3) to read as follows:  "Nothing in this 
article shall prevent the State from making any special provision 
for women and children or for the Scheduled Castes or backward 
tribes, for their advantage, safeguard or betterment." (Shah 
amendment in italics).  Prof. Shah proposed the amendment:
" so that any special discrimination in favour of 
them may not be regarded as violating the basic 
principles of equality for all classes of citizens in the 
country.  They need and must be given for some time 
to come at any rate, special treatment in regard to 
education, in regard to opportunity for employment, 
and in many other cases where their present 
inequality, the present backwardness is only a 
hindrance to the rapid development of the country.  
equality is not to be equality of name only or on paper 
only, but equality of fact.  [pages 655-656 CAD, Vol. 7, 
29 November 1948]."
(emphasis supplied) 

211.	Relevant to the instant case, he explains that his 
amendment would allow the State to provide SC/ST special 
treatment in regard to education.  In other words, Prof. Shah 
effectively wanted the equivalent to 15(4) and 15(5) but did not 
get it.  His amendment was negated. (p. 664 of Constituent 
Assembly Debates, Vol. 7, 29 November, 1948). 

212.	Dr. Ambedkar disagreed with Prof. Shah on the limited 
ground that it would have given States the green light to 
segregate SC/ST from general category students:  
"The object which all of us have in mind is that the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled tribes should not be 
segregated from the general public.  For instance, 
none of us, I think, would like that a separate school 
should be established for the Scheduled Castes  If 
these words are added, it will probably give a handle 
for a State to say, 'Well, we are making special 
provision for the Scheduled Castes.' To my mind they 
can safely say so by taking shelter under the article if 
it is amended in the manner the Professor wants it." 
[page 661, CAD, Vol. 7, 29 November 1948].  

213.	Dr Ambedkar did not reject the Shah amendment because 
it would have allowed the States to implement affirmative action 
for SC/ST in education.  He was concerned that special 
provisions would lead to negative discriminatory action in the 
guise of affirmative action.  Whether or not this would have 
happened is unclear, but his concern seems well placed.  A 
similar problem arises today, when the general category looks 
down upon or questions the qualifications of SC/ST/OBC 
professionals.  Though the individual may have earned 
admission on marks alone, others may presume that reservation 
was a factor.  Such a belief, regardless of veracity, cannot bode 
well for the career prospects of SC/ST/SEBCs.  Irrespective of 
the reason for which the Shah amendment was rejected, the 
original Framers contemplated special provisions for SC/ST that 
would have included education.  At the end of the day, they 
decided that only women and children should benefit from 
discriminatory provisions.  

214.	Article 15(4) and the Shah amendment only differ in that 
Article 15(4) provides special provisions to SC/ST and SEBC, 
while Shah only gave the same to SC/ST.  Of course, if the 
original Framers rejected special provisions for SC/ST, they 
would have done the same with respect to SEBC/SC/ST.  In 
sum, by limiting Article 15(3) to women and children and 
rejecting an amendment equivalent to Article 15(4), the original 
Framers' intent was clear:  no special provisions for backward 
classes (SEBC/SC/ST) in education were to dilute Article 15(1)'s 
prohibition against discrimination based on caste.    

215.	In the instant case, the Union of India argued that Article 
15(4), the First Amendment to the Constitution, reflects the 
intent of the original Framers because it was passed by the same 
members that drafted the original Constitution.  In the 
Parliamentary debates in 1951, Prime Minister Nehru argued in 
favour amending the Constitution.  He and other Framers, as 
distinguished from the original Framers who had drafted the 
original Constitution, did not hide their disapproval of 
Champakam Dorairajan (supra).  Article 15(4) was to overturn 
that judgment.  To justify Article 15(4), which represented a 
dramatic departure from equality as envisaged in Articles 15(2), 
(3) and 29(2), Pandit Nehru said that Article 15(4) would give 
effect to "what  was really intended or should be intended." Yet, 
the original Framers, as explained above, had no intention of 
providing special provisions for SC/ST in education (and a 
fortiori if not for them, nor for SEBC).  What "should be intended" 
is a far cry from what they specifically enacted and specifically 
rejected.  It follows that Article 15(4) deviated from the original 
Framers' original intent. 

7  	Limitations on Reservation must be seen in the 
light of providing a casteless society: 

216.	Seeking to remove the blight created by caste, the original 
Framers were social reformers.   "The social revolution meant 'to 
get (India) out of the medievalism based on birth, religion, 
custom, and community and reconstruct her social structure on 
modern foundations of law, individual merit, and secular 
education'." (See: Granville Austin, Indian Constitution: 
Cornerstone of a Nation at page 26, 1st Ed, 1972, Oxford 
University press: (quoting from:  K. Santhanam (an Assembly 
member) in Magazine Section, The Hindustan Times New Delhi, 8 
September 1946). 

217.	India's first President Rajendra Prasad assured the Nation 
that the assembly and the Government's aim was to "end poverty 
and squalor  to abolish distinction and exploitation and to 
ensure decent conditions of living". [Cornerstone at page 27, fn. 5 
(quoting from Prasad in CAD V, I, 2)].  The original Framers took 
steps to abolish caste-based distinction.  For example, they 
outlawed untouchability in Article 17, promised all equal 
treatment before the law in Article 14, prohibited discrimination 
based on caste in 15(1) and 29(2) and selected joint over separate 
electorates.  The legislative reservations for SC/ST were an 
exception to overarching goal of creating a casteless society; that 
is why they were set to expire in 1960.  With respect to 
electorates, Granville Austin explains:
"Desiring above all to promote national unity, 
members of the Constitutional Assembly rejected 
these devices by substituting direct elections for 
indirect in lower houses, by rejecting separate 
electorates in favour of joint electorates and by 
abolishing   except for Scheduled Castes and Tribes 
 reserved seats.  The Assembly believed, in Jenning's 
words, that 'to recognize communal claims . . . is to 
strengthen communalism'.  [see: Austin, p. 323 of 
Cornerstone.]"
(emphasis added)  
The same can be said today.  Reservation based on caste 
strengthens communalism.  Non-SEBCs naturally seek SEBC 
status so that they may capture SEBC benefits.  Upper castes, 
denied a seat, harbor ill will against lower castes who gain 
admission (whether it was by merit or not).  

218.	These feelings are the basis for discriminatory action. On 
16 September 2006, The Hindu reported:  "While medical 
students at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) 
have complained of caste discrimination, now doctors from the 
reserved category at the Guru Teg Bahadur Hospital (GTBH) too 
have written about 'biased attitude towards reserved category 
junior residents'." 

219.	Discrimination is not the only problem exacerbated by 
reservation.  Given that reserved category students gain 
admission with lower marks, it also stands to reason that they 
would exhibit less confidence in their studies when pitted against 
the general category.  In her work on the unintended 
consequences of preferential treatment for minorities in college 
admissions in the United States, Marie Gryphon, a policy analyst 
for the Cato Institute (Washington, D.C.), writes:
"recent research shows that affirmative action 
impedes academic achievement by undermining 
minority students' confidence.  

Preferences harm students' self-images, and this 
harm has practical costs in terms of grades and 
graduation rates.  Both studies build on earlier work 
by Stanford University sociologist Claude Steele, who 
coined the term "stereotype threat" to refer to the 
decline in performance suffered by members of 
groups who become afraid of confirming negative 
group stereotypes.  Steele tested his theory by giving 
standardized exams to groups of white and African-
American undergraduates at Stanford University. 

Testers told some groups that the exam evaluated 
psychological factors related to testing, and that it 
was not a measure of ability.  They told other groups 
that the exam measured their intellectual abilities, 
and in some instances had them indicate their race 
on the exam.  The African-American students who 
had been implicitly "threatened" with the stereotype 
of minority academic inferiority did markedly worse 
on the exam than black students in the other groups.  


Even minority students who do not need preferences 
respond to an environment characterized by the 
relative academic weakness of minorities by worrying 
about confirming a negative stereotype.  
[Researchers] also determined that vulnerability to 
Claude Steel's stereotype threat is related to lower 
grades earned by minority students." (See: p. 9-10 
(internal citations omitted), Executive Summary, No. 
540, April 6, 2005, "The Affirmative Action Myth.")  

The point is that affirmative action produces consequences that 
may outweigh its supposed benefits.  

220.	To rid ourselves of reservation and its unintended 
consequences like casteism, we must focus our efforts on 
strengthening education at the primary and secondary level.  
Only then will we achieve the casteless/classless society the 
original Framers envisaged.  And only then will there be reason 
to scrap reservation altogether.  

221.	In his speeches to the Parliament regarding 15(4), Prime 
Minister Nehru could not have been clearer:  "After all the whole 
purpose of the Constitution, as proclaimed in the Directive 
Principles is to move towards what I may say a casteless and 
classless society"  and in an attempt to achieve an egalitarian 
society, " we want to put an end to all those infinite divisions 
that have arisen in our social life; I am referring to the caste 
system and other religious divisions, call them by whatever name 
you like." (emphasis added).   [Parliamentary Debates on 13 
June, 1951 and 29 May, 1951 respectively].
7	If reservation is allowed, then how can a 
casteless society still be realized?

222.	This raises the issue of how beneficiaries of special 
provisions are to be classified.   As mentioned above, Mr Salve 
and other learned counsel for petitioners pleaded that the 
Government cannot go forward with the Reservation Act when it 
has yet to identify its beneficiaries. No one can say with certainty 
what percentage of the population is OBC, yet the Government is 
content with giving OBCs 27% of the seats in universities. We do 
not know what proportion of the population is OBC because the 
census does not count OBCs. It has been Central Government 
policy practically since Independence to avoid the question.  
Eminent American Professor Mark Galanter writes that the 
absence of caste data was the deliberate policy of Sardar Patel, 
the Home Minister until 1950. Mr. Patel  rejected caste 
tabulation as a device to confirm the British theory that India 
was a caste-ridden country and as an expedient "to meet the 
needs of administrative measures dependent on caste division" 
(See: Professor Marc Galanter, (1978)"Who are the OBCs?"  An 
Introduction to a Constitutional Puzzle. 13 Economic and Political 
Weekly 1812 at page 1824 at footnote 78 (quoting from Mr. 
Patel's 1950 address to the census conference).  Taking an OBC 
census is horrifying because it encourages Government to enact 
policy on the basis of caste. Doing so only furthers the caste-
divide, contrary to our constitutional aim.  This has been 
recognized since 1950. If the Central Governments have 
consistently rejected an OBC census because it would promote 
casteism, how can this Central Government make reservation on 
the same ground?  It is one thing to ask a citizen his caste, it is 
even worse to grant or reject his college application on that 
ground.  The Government is between a rock and a hard place. 
The only way out is to use exclusively economic criteria. This 
would negate the need for a caste-based census while ensuring 
that reservation go to the poor, the group for which the 
Reservation Act was purportedly passed.  The Parliament 
eventually settled on enabling States to provide provisions for 
"socially and educationally backward classes."  Article 15(4). This 
Court has interpreted "backward classes" to include caste as one 
of the criteria of classification under Article 16(4).  Sahwney I, 
para 859(3)(b).  In other words, caste falls under class according 
to Sawheny I, para 859(3)(a).  
7 	Economic criteria allows for reservation on 
grounds  other than caste:

223.	Despite the goal of a casteless society, the Parliament 
allowed for caste-based reservation and, consequently, caste-
based discrimination.  Ultimately, they subjected Articles 29(2) 
and Article 15 to Article 15(4).  Dr. Ambedkar saw no choice but 
to discriminate based on caste, stating that "if you make a 
reservation in favour of what are called backward classes which 
are nothing else but collection of certain castes, those who are 
excluded are persons who belong to certain castes. Therefore, in 
the circumstances of this country, it is impossible to avoid 
reservation without excluding some people who have got a caste." 

224.	In draft article 10, Dr. Ambedkar tried to reconcile the view 
of those who were in favour of equality of opportunity with the 
demand of certain communities who remained neglected and 
who wanted to have a share in the administration.  In doing so, 
he was clear that the concept of equality, which is the very basis 
of democracy, should not be violated.  Part of his compromise 
meant that reservation had to remain reasonable.  Explaining his 
views on the matter, he said:
"Supposing, for instance, we were to concede in full 
the demand of those communities who have not been 
so far employed in the public services to the fullest 
extent, what would really happen is, we shall be 
completely destroying the first proposition upon which 
we are all agreed, namely, that there shall be an 
equality of opportunity.  Let me give an illustration.  
Supposing, for instance, reservations were made for a 
community or a collection of communities, the total of 
which came to something like 70 per cent of the total 
posts under the State and only 30 per cent are 
retained as the unreserved.  Could anybody say that 
the reservation of 30 per cent as open to general 
competition would be satisfactory from the point of 
view of giving effect to the first principle, namely, that 
there shall be equality of opportunity?  It cannot be in 
my judgment.  Therefore the seats to be reserved, if 
reservation is to be consistent with sub-clause (1) of 
Article 10, must be confined to a minority of seats. 
(see CAD, Vol.7,  30th November, 1948 pp 701-02)."

225.	On 17th November, 1949, the Constituent Assembly began 
the third reading of the Constitution Bill.  While replying to the 
debate, Dr. Ambedkar stated:
"This anxiety is deepened by the realization of the 
fact that in addition to our old enemies in the form of 
castes and creeds we are going to have many political 
parties with diverse and opposing political creeds.  
Will Indians place the country above their creed or will 
they place creed above country?  I do not know.  But 
this much is certain that if the parties place creed 
above country, our independence will be put in 
jeopardy a second time and probably be lost forever.  
This eventuality we must all resolutely guard against.  
We must be determined to defend our independence 
with the last drop of our blood. (See: CAD on 25th 
November, 1949 pp 977-978)"
 (emphasis supplied).  

226.	Exhibiting tunnel vision, our First Parliament failed to look 
beyond caste.  Another option was available, an option that 
adhered to the original Framers' ideals.  Contrary to Dr 
Ambedkar's view, it was possible to provide reservation to 
backward classes without discriminating based on caste.  
Economic criteria target the poorest of the poor, irrespective of 
caste.  As noted, these criteria also simultaneously remove the 
creamy layer. 

227.	One of the other prominent advocates of reservation later 
realised that the policy did more harm than good.  Prime 
Minister Nehru wrote the following letter to the Chief Ministers 
on June 27th, 1961:  
"I have referred above to efficiency and to our getting 
out of our traditional ruts. This necessitates our 
getting out of the old habit of reservations and 
particular privileges being given to this caste or that 
group. The recent meeting we held here, at which the 
chief ministers were present, to consider national 
integration, laid down that help should be given on 
economic considerations and not on caste. It is true 
that we are tied up with certain rules and conventions 
about helping Scheduled Castes and Tribes. They 
deserve help but, even so, I dislike any kind of 
reservation, more particularly in service. I react 
strongly against anything which leads to inefficiency 
and second-rate standards. I want my country to be a 
first class country in everything. The moment we 
encourage the second-rate, we are lost.

The only real way to help a backward group is to give 
opportunities for good education. This includes 
technical education, which is becoming more and 
more important. Everything else is provision of some 
kind of crutches which do not add to the strength or 
health of the body. We have made recently two 
decisions which are very important: one is, universal 
free elementary education, that is the base; and the 
second is scholarships on a very wide scale at every 
grade of education to bright boys and girls, and this 
applies not merely to literary education, but, much 
more so, to technical, scientific and medical training. I 
lay stress on bright and able boys and girls. I have no 
doubt that there is a vast reservoir of potential talent 
in this country if only we can give it opportunity.

But if we go in for reservations on communal and 
caste basis, we swamp the bright and able people and 
remain second-rate or third-rate. I am grieved to learn 
of how far this business of reservation has gone based 
on communal consideration. It has amazed me to 
learn that even promotions are based sometimes on 
communal and caste considerations. This way lies not 
only folly, but disaster. Let's help the backward groups 
by all means, but never at the cost of efficiency. How 
are we going to build our public sector or indeed any 
sector with second-rate people?"

7  	Upon expiry of the time limit, the criteria for 
identifying OBCs should only be economic in 
nature because our ultimate aim is to establish a 
casteless and classless society

228.	I am not the first to propose economic criteria as the 
exclusive means of identifying SEBCs.  In Vasanth Kumar's 
case, counsel sought an opinion from the Court regarding 
reservations in employment and education for SC/STs and 
OBCs. The opinion would guide the Karnataka Government in 
implementing reservation. [para 1]. It serves our purposes to 
review their thorough analysis of the identification issue.  

229.	The Court in Vasanth Kumar observed as under:
"24. ... No one is left in any doubt that the future 
Indian Society was to be casteless and classless. 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru the first Prime Minister of 
India said that Mahatma Gandhi has shaken the 
foundations of caste and the masses have been 
powerfully affected. But an even greater power than 
Gandhi is at work, the conditions of modern life  and 
it seems at last this hoary and tenacious ralic of past 
times must die. (Discovery of India by Pandit Nehru, 
Ch VI, p 234) Mahatma Gandhi, the Father of the 
Nation said, "The caste system as we know is an 
anachronism. It must go if both Hinduism and India 
are to live and grow from day to day". In its onward 
march towards realising the constitutional goal, every 
attempt has to be made to destroy caste stratification. 
Article 38(2) enjoins the State to strive to minimise the 
inequality in income and endeavour to eliminate 
inequalities in status, facilities and opportunities, not 
only amongst individuals but also amongst groups of 
people residing in different areas or engaged in 
different vocations. Article 46 enjoins duty to promote 
with special care the educational and economic 
interests of the weaker sections of the people, and in 
particular, of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice 
and all forms of exploitation. Continued retention of 
the division of the society into various castes 
simultaneously introduces inequality of status. And 
this inequality in status is largely responsible for 
retaining inequality in facilities and opportunities, 
ultimately resulting in bringing into existence an 
economically depressed class far transcending caste 
structure and caste barrier. The society therefore, was 
to be classless casteless society. In order to set up 
such a society, steps have to be taken to weaken and 
progressively eliminate caste structure. Unfortunately, 
the movement is in the reverse gear. Caste 
stratification has become more rigid to some extent, 
and where concessions and preferred treatment 
schemes are introduced for economically 
disadvantaged classes, identifiable by caste label, the 
caste structure unfortunately received a fresh lease of 
life. In fact there is a mad rush for being recognised as 
belonging to a caste which by its nomenclature would 
be included in the list of socially and educationally 
backward classes. ... Rane Commission took note of 
the fact that there was an organised effort for being 
considered socially and educationally backward 
castes. Rane Commission recalled the observations in 
Balaji case [(1963) Supp (1) SCR 439] that "Social 
backwardness is on the ultimate analysis the result of 
poverty to a very large extent".  The Commission 
came to an irrefutable conclusion that amongst 
certain castes and communities or class of people, 
only lower income groups amongst them are socially 
and educationally backward. " 

230.	In this judgment, this Court further observed that if State 
patronage for preferred treatment accepts caste as the only 
insignia for determining social and educational backwardness, 
the danger looms large that this approach alone would legitimize 
and perpetuate the caste system. Caste-based reservation does 
not go well with our secular character as enshrined in the 
Preamble to the Constitution. 

231.	That said, the majority in Sawhney I later sided with 
Justice Chinnappa Reddy's view:  caste can be a factor in 
identifying SEBCs.  This view should not hold the day forever.  
Eventually, the words of Justice Desai should be revived.  

232.	Justice Desai wanted to achieve two goals with one fell 
swoop of the pen.  Had his opinion prevailed (1) the creamy layer 
would have been removed ensuring that the truly deserving get 
the benefit and (2) the casteless society would have been 
furthered.  To these ends, he would have applied economic 
criteria to remove the creamy layer and simultaneously rid 
reservation of caste.  
233.	He explained that poverty is the bane of Indian society.  
Given rampant poverty, it comes as no surprise that " the bank 
balance, the property holding and the money power determine 
the social status of the individual and guarantee the 
opportunities to rise to the top echelon."  [Vasanth Kumar at 
para 27].  As a result, the way "wealth is acquired has lost 
significance."  And "upper caste does not enjoy the status or 
respect  any more even in rural areas what to speak of highly 
westernised urban society."  Finally, his Lordship recognized that 
creamy layer exclusion is inherently linked with identification 
based on economic criteria, i.e., "occupation, income and land 
holdings":  
 "30.  If economic criterion for compensatory 
discrimination or affirmative action is accepted, it 
would strike at the root cause of social and 
educational backwardness, and simultaneously take a 
vital step in the direction of destruction of caste 
structure which in turn would advance the secular 
character of the Nation. This approach seeks to 
translate into reality the twin constitutional goals: 
one, to strike at the perpetuation of the caste 
stratification of the Indian Society so as to arrest 
progressive movement and to take a firm step towards 
establishing a casteless society; and two, to 
progressively eliminate poverty by giving an 
opportunity to the disadvantaged sections of the 
society to raise their position and be part of the 
mainstream of life which means eradication of 
poverty."

234.	Economic criteria must include occupation and land 
holdings because income alone is insufficient.  To decrease the 
likelihood that the undeserving evade identification, it is wise to 
employ more than one criterion.  

235.	In Vasanth Kumar, Justice Chinnappa Reddy departs from 
Justice Desai's use of economic criteria as the sole means of 
identification.  Nevertheless, he recognizes that "  attainment of 
economic equality is the final and only solution to the besetting 
problems."  In Justice Chinnappa Reddy's opinion, it is easier to 
classify based on caste than economic criteria:  
"80: 	Class poverty, not individual poverty, is therefore 
the primary test. Other ancillary tests are the way of 
life, the standard of living, the place in the social 
hierarchy, the habits and customs, etc. etc. Despite 
individual exceptions, it may be possible and easy to 
identify socially backwardness with reference to caste, 
with reference to residence, with reference to 
occupation or some other dominant feature. 
Notwithstanding our antipathy to caste and sub-
regionalism, these are facts of life which cannot be 
wished away. If they reflect poverty which is the 
primary source of social and educational 
backwardness, they must be recognised for what they 
are along with other less primary sources." 

It all depends on how one defines "class."  Once economic criteria 
remove the relatively wealthy families (from all castes and 
communities), a "class" will remain.  This "class" is known as 
"the poor."  The class would share the same characteristic, 
irrespective of caste.  They would all lack money.    

236.	In a number of judgments, this Court has spelt out our 
constitutional philosophy regarding caste. On numerous 
occasions, this Court has proclaimed that the cherished goal of 
the Nation is to realise a casteless society.  In Shri V. V. Giri v. 
Dippala Suri Dora &amp; Others (1960) 1 SCR 426 at 442, the 
Court observed as under:-
"..The history of social reform for the last century 
and more has shown how difficult it is to break or 
even to relax the rigour of the inflexible and exclusive 
character of the caste system. It is to be hoped that 
this position will change, and in course of time the 
cherished ideal of casteless society truly based on 
social equality will be attained under the powerful 
impact of the doctrine of social justice and equality 
proclaimed by the Constitution and sought to be 
implemented by the relevant statutes and as a result 
of the spread of secular education and the growth of a 
rational outlook and of proper sense of social values; 
but at present it would be unrealistic and utopian to 
ignore the difficulties which a member of the 
depressed tribe or caste has to face in claiming a 
higher status amongst his co-religionists. It is in the 
light of this background that the alternative plea of the 
appellant must be considered."

237.	In N M. Thomas (supra), a seven Judge Bench observed as 
under:
"This consummation is accomplished only when the 
utterly depressed groups can claim a fair share in 
public life and economic activity, including 
employment under the State, or when a classless and 
casteless society blossoms as a result of positive State 
action."

238.	In his dissenting opinion, in Sawhney I Justice Kuldip 
Singh observed as under:
"339. Secularism is the basic feature of the Indian 
Constitution.  It envisages a cohesive, unified and 
casteless society. ...  The prohibition on the ground of 
caste is total, the mandate is that never again in this 
country caste shall raise its head.  Even access to 
shops on the ground of caste is prohibited.  The 
progress of India has been from casteism and 
egalitarianism from feudalism to freedom.

340.	The caste system which has been put in the 
grave by the framers of the Constitution is trying to 
raise its ugly head in various forms.  Caste poses a 
serious threat to the secularism and as a consequence 
to the integrity of the country.  Those who do not learn 
from the events of history are doomed to suffer again."

239.	In Akhil Bhartiya Soshit Karamchari Sangh (Railway) 
(supra), it was observed as under::
"14. These forces nurtured the roots of our 
constitutional values among which must be found the 
fighting faith in a casteless society, not by obliterating 
the label but by advancement of the backward  

240.	Returning to Vasanth Kumar, one of Justice Reddy's 
arguments deals with the level of effort required to identify the 
poor compared to the effort expended on identifying caste.  In the 
current context, a number of factors, including economic, are 
measured to determine SEBC status. (See: the National 
Commission of Backward Classes' Guidelines for considerations 
of Requests for inclusion and complaints of under-inclusion in 
the Central List of Other Backward Classes).

241.	The National Commission for Backward Classes aside, I 
have set out to eventually install a system that only takes 
cognizance of economic criteria. Using purely economic criteria 
would lighten the identification load, as ascertaining caste would 
no longer be required.   Respondents and others level a common 
criticism against the exclusive use of economic criteria.  Most of 
the country is poor.  

242.	Thus, too many people would be eligible for the benefit.  
This is only a problem if you hand out reservations based on the 
group's proportion of the total population. Such a reservation 
would be excessively unreasonable and would likely violate the 
Balaji cap of 50% [see M.R. Balaji &amp; Ors. v. State of Mysore 
[(1963) Supp (1) SCR 439]. If economic reservation were limited 
to a reasonable number, it could be upheld.  

243. In addition to the problem of extending the benefit to too 
many, Reddy, J. cannot contemplate the idea of bestowing 
reservation on an economically poor Brahmin.  "The idea that 
poor Brahmins may also be eligible for the benefits of Articles 
15(4) and 16(4) is too grotesque even to be considered."   He says 
that they are not "socially backward", thus they should not 
receive the benefit.  But can one call a Brahmin sweeper, poor by 
occupation, socially forward?  To do so would be a stretch.  

244.	The majority in Sawhney I reiterates Justice Chinnappa 
Reddy's message in Vasanth Kumar.  They rejected the sole use 
of economic criteria to exclude the creamy layer, deeming it to be 
just one measure of advancement. Justice Jeevan Reddy 
qualified that sentiment to an extent.  If income were extremely 
high, it could be the sole factor.  In such a case,  income alone 
would ensure that one were socially forward.  Justice Jeevan 
Reddy was convinced that caste mattered more than money  
especially in rural areas.  He makes his point by way of example 
at para 792:  
"A member of backward class, say a member of 
carpenter caste, goes to Middle East and works there 
as a carpenter. If you take his annual income in 
rupees, it would be fairly high from the Indian 
standard. Is he to be excluded from the Backward 
Class? Are his children in India to be deprived of the 
benefit of Article 16(4)?"

245.	Unless the carpenter became a factory owner, where his 
income would be a reflection of his status, Justice Reddy would 
answer his own question in the negative.  This is where we part 
ways.  Today, the NRI carpenter's children will have likely 
attended the best schools, tuitions and coaching classes that 
money can buy.  These children do not need special provisions.  
That is why I am removing the creamy layer, calling for a time-
limit on caste-based reservation and urging the Government to 
use exclusively economic criteria to identify OBCs who may avail 
of special provisions. 

246.	The United States Supreme Court has taken a similar 
position with regard to setting a time-limit on race-based 
affirmative action.  As mentioned above, Justice Sandra Day 
O'Connor opined that there may be a time-limit to promoting 
diversity via preferential treatment for certain races: "We expect 
that 25 years from now, the use of racial preferences will no 
longer be necessary to further the interest approved today."  (See: 
Grutter at 343).  

247.	In our context, one need not look past the Parliament's 
affinity with extending time-limits on reservation to see that only 
the judiciary can put a stop to caste-based reservation.  Article 
334 originally said that reservation for SC/ST/Anglo-Indians in 
the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies would expire on 
the Constitution's tenth birthday.  The Parliament later 
substituted "ten" for "thirty years" vide the 45th Amendment.  
When that was to expire, the Parliament extended it for another 
ten years vide the 62nd Amendment.  When that was to expire, it 
extended it for another ten years vide the 79th Amendment.  
History has shown that it is not politically feasible for the 
Parliament to say "no" to reservation  especially when caste is 
involved. 

248.	Nevertheless, I have noted that Sawhney I rejects purely 
economic criteria (occupation/income/property holdings/or 
similar measures of economic power) with respect to 
classification under 16(4).  [para 859, 4(a)].  Sawhney I's nine-
Judge holding precludes us from striking the impugned 
legislation to the extent that it has not yet ruled out the use of 
caste-based criteria for identifying SEBC status.  It also 
precludes us from forcing the Government to wean itself off 
caste-based reservation by a certain date. In order to achieve a 
casteless and classless society, after a lapse of ten years, special 
preference or reservation should be granted only on the basis of 
economic criteria as long as grave disparity and inequality 
persist.  

7 	Secularism is Part of the Basic Structure 
249. To be clear, there is no claim arising out of the goal to 
promote a casteless society.  No right of action exists.  The right 
of action is found in secularism. Though not explicitly found in 
the un-amended Constitution, the original Framers made it clear 
that India was to be a secular democracy.  Discrimination based 
on religion is prohibited by Articles 14, 15(1) and 15(2), 16(1) and 
16(2), 29(2) and 325.  The original Framers went out of their way 
to ensure that minorities would be able to maintain their 
identity.  (See: Articles 28, 29 and 30).  Article 27 precludes the 
state from adopting a state religion, whereas Article 25 grants 
citizens the right to profess, practice and propagate religion.  
With rights come responsibilities.  One of them is found at Article 
51A(3), which instructs citizens " to promote harmony and 
spirit of brotherhood amongst all people  transcending 
religious  diversities." 

250. Relying on these provisions, Bommai (1994) 3 SCC 1 at 
para 304 declared secularism ".a constitutional goal and a 
basic feature of the Constitution as affirmed in Kesavananda  
Bharati and Indira N. Gandhi v. Raj Narain.  Any step 
inconsistent with this constitutional policy is, in plain words, 
unconstitutional." The Court reasoned that the original Framers 
adopted Articles 25, 26 and 27 so as to further secularism.  (See: 
Bommai at para 28 (Ahmadi, J.)). Secularism was very much 
embedded in their constitutional philosophy. [para 29]. During 
the Constituent Assembly Debates, Pandit Laxmikantha Mitra 
stated (as quoted at para 28 of Bommai): 
"By secular State, as I understand it, it is meant that 
the State is not going to make any discrimination 
whatsoever on the ground of religion or community 
against any person professing any particular form of 
religious faith.  no citizen  will have any 
preferential treatment  simply on the ground that he 
professed a particular form of religion."

This is relevant today because quotas are state-sponsored 
discrimination against those who are not deemed SEBCs - caste 
being a by-product of religion.  Though affirmative action is 
allowed, there is a point at which it violates secularism.  Finally, 
I note that the 42nd Amendment, which formally inserted 
secularism into the Preamble, merely made what was already 
implicit explicit. (See Bommai at para 29).  

7  	Conclusion on the Casteless Society 
251. In conclusion, the First Parliament, by enacting Article 
15(5), deviated from the original Framers' intent.  They passed an 
amendment that strengthens, rather than weakens casteism.  If 
caste-based quotas in education are to stay, they should adhere 
to a basic tenet of secularism:  they should not take caste into 
account. Instead, exclusively economic criteria should be used.  
For a period of ten years, other factors such as income, 
occupation and property holdings etc. including caste, may be 
taken into consideration and thereafter only economic criteria 
should prevail.  Sawhney I has tied our hands.  I nevertheless 
believe that caste matters and will continue to matter as long as 
we divide society along caste-lines.  Caste-based discrimination 
remains. Violence between castes occurs.  Caste politics rages 
on.  Where casteism is present, the goal of achieving a casteless 
society must never be forgotten. Any legislation to the contrary 
should be discarded.  

5.	Are Articles 15(4) and 15(5) mutually contradictory, 
such that 15(5) is unconstitutional?

252.	While contradictory, I am able to read them harmoniously.  
Learned senior counsel for petitioners, Mr. K.K. Venugopal, 
argued that Articles 15(5) and 15(4) are inconsistent to the 
extent that 15(5) exempts minority institutions from reservation 
and 15(4) incorporates aided minority institutions in the 
reservation scheme. Because both provisions contain "non-
obstante clauses", they render each other void.  He further 
submitted that the Court is in the position of having to choose 
between them in regard to this inconsistency. He provided three 
tests of statutory interpretation that give us guidance in 
resolving such a conflict.

253. First, if the Court cannot harmonize the two provisions, it 
must invalidate the one that completely destroys the other's 
purpose.  Sarwan Singh &amp; Another v. Kasturi Lal (1977) 1 
SCC 750, pages 760-761, at para 20). In the instant case, one of 
the express purposes of 15(5) was to exempt minority 
institutions and thus avoid conflict with Article 30(1).  This is 
found in the text of Article 15(5) itself.

254.	With nothing in the text of 15(4) to guide us, we turn to its 
Statement of Objects and Reasons: 
"The Act also amplifies Article 15(3) so as to 
ensure that any special provisions that the State may 
make for the educational, economic or social 
advancement of any backward class citizens may not 
be challenged on the ground of being discriminatory. "

255.	Thus, Article 15(4) was not passed with an express 
intention to include minority institutions; nor did it arise out of a 
case in which minority institutions were a party. Then again, it 
was open to the First Parliament to exclude minority institutions 
from the beginning. Articles 15(4) and 15(5)'s purposes do not 
necessarily conflict.  I find the first test inconclusive and thus 
turn to the other ones.  The second test asks which provision 
came into effect at a later date (i.e., was "later in time?")? That 
which is later shall prevail.  Here, 15(5) was enacted later in 
time.  In J.K. Cotton Spinning and Weaving Mills Co. Ltd. v. 
State of Uttar Pradesh &amp; Others AIR 1961 SC 1170 at page 
1174, para 9, I find the third test; it provides that the specific 
clause must trump the general. Article 15(5) is specific in that it 
refers to special provisions that relate to admission in 
educational institutions, whereas 15(4) makes no such reference 
to the type of entity at which special provisions are to be enjoyed.  

256.	Because 15(5) is later in time and specific to the question 
presented, it must neutralize 15(4) in regard to reservation in 
education. Mr K. Parasaran, learned senior counsel for the 
respondents, correctly pointed out that constitutional articles are 
to be read harmoniously, not in isolation.  (See: T.M.A. Pai 
(supra) at page 582, para 148).  Our interpretation is 
harmonious because Article 15(4) still applies to other areas in 
which reservation may be passed. 
6.	Does Article 15(5)'s exemption of minority 
institutions from the purview of reservation 
violate Article 14 of the Constitution?

257.	Given the inherent tension between Articles 29(2) and 30(1), 
I find that the overriding constitutional goal of realizing a 
casteless/classless society should serve as a tie-breaker.   We 
will take a step in the wrong direction if we subject minority 
institutions (even those that are aided) to reservation. 

258.	Minority aided institutions were subject to a limited form of 
reservation.  In order to preserve the minority character of the 
institution, reservation could only be imposed to a reasonable 
extent. Minority aided institutions could select their own 
students, contingent upon admitting a reasonable number of 
non-minority students per the percentage provided by the State 
Government.  This conclusion was derived from two conflicting 
constitutional articles.  Of course, I am only concerned with 
minority aided institutions because I have already determined 
that the State shall not impose reservation on unaided 
institutions (minority or non-minority).  

259.	Article 30(1) provides that "all minorities, whether based on 
religion or language, shall have the right to establish and 
administer educational institutions of their choice."  Article 29(2) 
states that "no citizen shall be denied admission into any 
educational institution maintained by the State or receiving aid 
out of State funds on grounds only of religion, race, caste, 
language or any of them."  

260.	In other words, 30(1) by itself would allow minority aided 
institutions to reject all non-minority candidates, and 29(2) by 
itself would preclude the same as discrimination based solely on 
religion.  Yet neither provision exists by itself.  Rather than 
disturb the Constitution, this Court struck a compromise and 
diluted each provision in order to uphold both.  Reading Articles 
30(1) and 29(2) harmoniously, Kerala Education Bill provided 
that once minority institutions receive aid, a sprinkling of 
outsiders must be admitted. 

261.	"Sprinkling" ensured that the minority character of the 
institution would not be lost. In regard to the "sprinkled" seats, 
minority institutions cannot discriminate based on religion in 
violation of Article 29(2).  At the same time, if the State compelled 
aided minority institutions to take too many non-minority 
students, the institution would be "minority" in name only. But 
what does "too many" mean?  Can "sprinkling" be quantified?   
Clearing up the ambiguity, St. Stephen's held that minority 
institutions must make 50% of their seats available to outsiders 
and that admission for the other 50% (its own community) must 
be done on merit.  Pai later rejected the rigidity attached to this 
fixed percentage.  Along these lines, Pai returned to a more 
flexible standard, one akin to "sprinkling" in Kerala Education 
Bill: the moment a minority institution takes aid, it has to admit 
non-minority students to a reasonable extent, whereby the 
character of the institution was maintained and yet citizens' 
Article 29(2) rights were not subverted. (Also see: Pai at para 
149). 

Thus, two admission pools were created for aided minority 
institutions:  minority and non-minority.   In the minority pool, 
merit was to be observed.  From the non-minority pool, 
reservations for the weaker sections may be made while the 
remaining seats, if any, would be distributed based on merit to 
non-minority students.  
 " It would be open to the state authorities to insist 
on allocating a certain percentage of seats to those 
belonging to weaker sections of society, from amongst 
the non-minority seats." [Pai at para 152].  

262.	With regard to the percentage of reservation, the State 
Governments were to determine the percentage of non-minority 
seats according to the needs of that State.  As a compliment to 
reservation, aided minority institutions were also subject to 
regulation of administration and management.  Pai declared at 
para 72 as noted above that:  
 "Once aid is granted to a private professional 
educational institution, the Government or the state 
agency, as a condition of the grant of aid, can put 
fetters on the freedom in the matter of administration 
and management of the institution. The state, which 
gives aid to an educational institution, can impose 
such conditions as are necessary for the proper 
maintenance of the high standards of education as the 
financial burden is shared by the state. "

263.	In addition to the general power to impose conditions that 
seek to maintain high standards or "excellence in education," the 
State could implement the same under a related but different 
rationale.  That is, said regulations could be upheld in the name 
of national interest. [Pai at para 107].  Yet the Government could 
not destroy the minority character of an institution. [para 107].  
Nor could it obliterate the establishment or administration of a 
minority institution.  [para 107].  A balance was to be struck 
between (a) maintaining academic quality and (b) preserving the 
minority right to establish/administer educational institutions.  
Regulations that embraced these two objectives were considered 
reasonable.  [Pai at para 122]. 

264.	A question of great import is whether Article 30 was 
designed to put minorities on equal or higher footing than non-
minorities.  This question played out in detail in a debate 
between Khare, C.J. and Justice Sinha in Islamic Academy.  
Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Khare takes issue with 
Pai.  The Chief Justice says that Pai has wrongly categorized 
minority rights as equal to those of the non-minority.  He has a 
point.  Minorities can establish and administer institutions for 
their communities per Article 30; non-minorities cannot.  His 
Lordship observed: (para 9 page 723)
"We do not read these paragraphs to mean that non-
minority educational institutions would have the same 
rights as those conferred on minority educational 
institutions by Article 30 of the Constitution of India. 
Non-minority educational institutions do not have the 
protection of Article 30. Thus, in certain matters they 
cannot and do not stand on a similar footing as 
minority educational institutions. Even though the 
principle behind Article 30 is to ensure that the 
minorities are protected and are given an equal 
treatment yet the special right given under Article 30 
does give them certain advantages"

Relying on St. Xavier's case (1975) 1 SCR 173, Pai concluded 
that the object of Article 30 was to ensure minorities of equal 
treatment and nothing more. 

265.	It was observed in St. Xaviers College case, at page 192, 
that "the whole object of conferring the right on minorities under 
Article 30 is to ensure that there will be equality between the 
majority and the minority. If the minorities do not have such 
special protection, they will be denied equality." The minority 
institutions must be allowed to do what the non-minority 
institutions are permitted to do. [Pai at para 138]. 

266. In contrast to the majority in Islamic, Justice Sinha 
concludes that Article 30(1) raises minorities to an equal 
platform and no higher.  Relevant portion is reproduced 
hereinbelow:
"The statement of law contained in paras 138 
and 139 is absolutely clear and unambiguous and no 
exception can be taken thereto. The doubt, if any, that 
the minorities have a higher right in terms of Article 
30(1) of the Constitution of India may be dispelled in 
clearest terms inasmuch as the right of the minorities 
and non-minorities is equal. Only certain additional 
protection has been conferred under Article 30(1) of 
the 'Constitution of India to bring the minorities on 
the same platform as that of non-minorities as regards 
the right to establish and administer an educational 
institution for the purpose of imparting education to 
members of their own community whether based on 
religion or language. [see: Islamic Academy at para 
105]." 

267. 	Justice Sinha considers it constitutionally immoral to 
discriminate against non-minorities in the guise of protecting the 
constitutional rights of minorities. [See: Islamic Academy at 
para 118].  Even in the face of Articles that provide preferential 
treatment to minority or weaker sections, e.g., 30(1), 15(4) and 
16(4), the right to equality must mean something. 

268.	Justice Khare, as he then was, concludes that original 
Framers conferred Article 30(1) on minorities in order to instill in 
them a sense of confidence and security. [Pai at page 615 at 
para 229].  Their right to establish and administer  educational 
institutions could not be usurped by mere legislation.  Khare, J. 
stated at para 229 p.615:-
"Thus, while maintaining the rule of non-
discrimination envisaged by Article 	29(2), the 
minorities should have also right to give preference to 
the students of their own community in the matter of 
admission in their own institution. Otherwise, there 
would be no meaningful purpose of Article 30(1) in the 
Constitution. True, the receipt of State aid makes it 
obligatory on the minority educational institution to 
keep the institution open to non-minority students 
without discrimination on the specified grounds. But, 
to hold that the receipt of State aid completely 
disentitles the management of minority educational 
institutions from admitting students of their 
community to any extent will be to denude the essence 
of Article 30 of the Constitution. It is, therefore, 
necessary that the minority be given preferential rights 
to admit students of their own community in their own 
institutions in a reasonable measure otherwise there 
would be no meaningful purpose of Article 30 in the 
Constitution."

269.	Minorities possess one right or privilege that non-minorities 
do not: establishing and administering institutions for their 
community.  The right to admit your own students in aided 
minority institutions was subject to admitting a reasonable 
number of outsiders.  In the instant case, aided minority 
institutions stand to benefit from the Reservation Act:  instead of 
having to admit a reasonable number of outsiders they would be 
exempted from reservation. However, their non-minority 
counterparts would not.  Does this elevate their status? While it 
does to a certain extent, however, we must also keep our 
constitutional goal and philosophy in mind.  Given the ultimate 
goal of furthering a classless/casteless society, there is no need 
to go out on a limb and rewrite them into the Amendment. Such 
a ruling would subject even more institutions to caste-based 
reservation.  This would be a step back for the Nation, furthering 
the caste divide.  I refuse to go in that direction.
7)   Are the standards of review laid down by the U.S. 
Supreme Court applicable to our review of 
affirmative action under Article 15(5) and similar 
provisions?

270.	As noted above, U.S. law is, of course, not binding but does 
have great persuasive value. This is because their problem of 
race is akin to our problem of caste.  Where others have reviewed 
similar issues in great detail, it behooves us to learn from their 
mistakes as well as accomplishments. 

	Mr. R. Venkataraman, former President of India in a 
foreword to a book of eminent constitutional expert Dr. L.M. 
Singhvi "Democracy And Rule of Law : Foundation And 
Frontiers", has aptly observed which reads as under:
"Society progresses only by exchange of thoughts and 
ideas.  Imagine what a sorry state the world would 
have been in had not thoughts and ideas spread to all 
corners of the globe.  Throughout history, 
philosophers, reformers, thinkers, and scholars have 
recorded their thoughts, regardless of whether they 
were accepted or not in their times, and thus 
contributed towards progress of humankind.  India 
was the first to encapsulate this seminal global 
thought. The Rig Veda says:

Ano bhadrah Krtavo yantu Viswatah

 Let noble thought come to us from every side."

8) 	With respect to OBC identification, was the 
Reservation Act's delegation of power to the 
Union Government excessive? 

271.	It is not an excessive delegation.  I agree with the Chief 
Justice's reasoning at para 185 of his judgment.

9) 	Is the impugned legislation invalid as it fails to 
set a time-limit for caste-based reservation?

272.	It is not invalid because it fails to set a time-limit. Given the 
Parliament's history of extending time-limits on other reservation 
schemes, there is much force to the argument that the 
Parliament will forever continue to extend reservations.  As noted 
above, it is consistent with our constitutional goal of achieving a 
classless/casteless society that a time-limit be set. But I am 
bound by Sawhney I and believe that only a larger bench could 
make such a ruling.  A larger bench could certainly hold that 
only economic criteria could be used to identify SEBCs and that 
it should be done by a certain date. 

10) At what point is a student no longer 
Educationally Backward and thus no longer 
eligible for special provisions under 15(5)? 

273.	Once a candidate graduates from a university, he must be 
considered educationally forward.  Senior counsel for petitioners, 
Mr. P.P. Rao, contended that those who have completed Plus 2 
should be considered educationally forward.  In other words, 
they would no longer be eligible for reservation in university or 
post-graduate studies.  There is some force in this argument 
where only 18% in the relevant age-group have completed Plus 2.  
From this vantage point, this means that they are educationally 
elite.  But the answer to most questions in law is not so simple.  
The answer often depends on the circumstances surrounding the 
issue.  In the marketplace, a candidate who has completed 
higher secondary education cannot be considered "forward".  The 
real value of the higher secondary degree is that it is a 
prerequisite for college admissions.  The general quality of 
education imparted upto Plus 2 is of extremely indifferent quality 
and apart from that, today some entry-level Government 
positions only accept college graduates. One is educationally 
backward until the candidate has graduated from a university.  
Once he has, he shall no longer enjoy the benefits of reservation.  
He is then deemed educationally forward.  For admission into 
Master's programmes, such as, Master of Engineering, Master of 
Laws, Master of Arts etc., none will be a fortiori eligible for 
special benefits for admission into post graduation or any further 
studies thereafter. 
11.	Would it be reasonable to balance OBC 
reservation with societal interests by instituting 
OBC cut-off marks that are slightly lower than 
that of the general category?
274.	Balaji (supra) concluded that reservation must be 
reasonable.  The Oversight Committee has made a 


recommendation that will ensure the same.  At page 34 of 
Volume I of its Report, the Oversight Committee recommended 
that institutions of excellence set their own cut off marks such 
that quality is not completely compromised.   Cut offs or 
admission thresholds as suggested by the Oversight Committee 
are reproduced:

	"4.4.2	The Committee recognizes that those 
institutions of higher learning which have established 
a global reputation (e.g. IITs, IIMs, IISc, AIIMS and 
other such exceptional quality institutions), can only 
maintain that if the highest quality in both faculty and 
students is ensured.  Therefore, the committee 
recommends that the threshold for admission should 
be determined by the respective institutions alone, as 
is done today, so that the level of its excellence is not 
compromised at all.

	4.4.3		As regards 'cut-offs' in institutions 
other than those mentioned in para 7, these may be 
placed somewhere midway between those for SC/ST 
and the unreserved category, carefully, calibrated so 
that the principles of both equity and excellence can 
be maintained. 

	4.4.4		The Committee strongly feels that the 
students who currently tend to get excluded must be 
given every single opportunity to raise their own levels 
of attainment, so that they can reach their true 
potential.  The Government should invest heavily in 
creating powerful, well designed and executed 
remedial preparatory measures to achieve this 
objective fully."

275.	Standards of excellence however should not be limited to 
the best aided institutions.  The Nation requires that its 
citizens have access to quality education.  Society as a whole 
stands to benefit from a rational reservation scheme. 

276.	Finding 68% reservation in educational institutions 
excessive, Balaji at pages 470-471 (supra) admonished States 
that reservation must be reasonable and balanced against 
other societal interests.  States have " to take reasonable 
and even generous steps to help the advancement of weaker 
elements; the extent of the problem must be weighted, the 
requirements of the community at large must be borne in 
mind and a formula must be evolved which would strike a 
reasonable balance between the several relevant 
considerations."  To strike such a balance, Balaji slashed the 
impugned reservation from 68 to less than 50%. 

277.	Balaji thus serves as an example in which this Court 
sought to ensure that reservation would remain reasonable.  
We heed this example. There should be no case in which the 
gap of cut off marks between OBC and general category 
students is too large.  To preclude such a situation, cut off 
marks for OBCs should be set no lower than 10 marks below 
the general category.   

278.	To this end, the Government shall set up a committee to 
look into the question of setting the OBC cut off at nor more 
than 10 marks below that of the general category.  Under such 
a scheme, whenever the non-creamy layer OBCs fail to fill the 
27% reservation, the remaining seats would revert to general 
category students.  

SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
1A. Whether the creamy layer be excluded from the 
93rd Amendment (Reservation Act)?

Yes, it must.  The 93rd amendment would be ultra vires and 
invalid if the creamy layer is not excluded. 
See paras 22, 25, 27, 30, 34, 35, 43, 44. 

1B. What are the parameters for creamy layer 
exclusion?

For a valid method of creamy layer exclusion, the 
Government may use its post-Sawhney I criteria as a template. 
(See: Office Memorandum dated 8-9-1993, para 2(c)/Column 3).  
I urge the Government to periodically revise the O.M. so that 
changing circumstances can be taken into consideration while 
keeping our constitutional goal in view.  

I further urge the Government to exclude the children of 
former and present Members of the Parliament and Members of 
Legislative Assemblies and the said O.M. be amended 
accordingly.  

See paras 55-57.  

1C. Is creamy layer exclusion applicable to SC/ST?  

 	In Indra Sawhney-I, creamy layer exclusion was only in 
regard to OBC.  Justice Reddy speaking for the majority at para 
792 stated that "this discussion is confined to Other Backward 
Classes only and has no relevance in the case of Scheduled 
Tribes and Scheduled Castes".  Similarly, in the instant case, the 
entire discussion was confined only to Other Backward Classes.  
Therefore, I express no opinion with regard to the applicability of 
exclusion of creamy layer to the Scheduled Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes. 
See para 34.

2.   Can the Fundamental Right under Article 21A be 
accomplished without great emphasis on 
primary education? 

No, it cannot. 

An inversion in priorities between higher and 
primary/secondary education would make compliance with 
Article 21A extremely difficult.  It is not suggested that higher 
education needs no encouragement or that higher education 
should not receive more funds, but there has to be much greater 
emphasis on primary education. Our priorities have to be 
changed.  Nothing is really more important than to ensure total 
compliance of Article 21A.  Total compliance means good quality 
education is imparted and all children aged six to fourteen 
regularly attend schools.  I urge the Government to implement 
the following:

The current patchwork of laws on compulsory education is 
insufficient. Monetary fines do not go far enough to ensure that 
Article 21A is implemented.  The Central Government should 
enact legislation that: 
(a)	provides low-income parents/guardians with 
financial incentives such that they may afford to 
send their children to schools; 

(b)	criminally penalizes those who receive financial 
incentives and despite such payment send their 
children to work; 

(c)	penalizes employers who preclude children 
from attending schools; 

(d)	the penalty should include imprisonment; the 
aforementioned Bill would serve as an example. 
The State is obligated under Article 21A to 
implement free and compulsory education in toto.

(e)	until we have accomplished for children from 
six to fourteen years the object of free and 
compulsory education, the Government should 
continue to increase the education budget and 
make earnest efforts to ensure that children go to 
schools and receive quality education; 

(f)	The Parliament should fix a deadline by which 
time free and compulsory education will have 
reached every child.  This must be done within 
six months, as the right to free and compulsory 
education is perhaps the most important of all 
the fundamental rights.  For without education, 
it becomes extremely difficult to exercise other 
fundamental rights. 

See paras 126-131. 

3.	Does the 93rd Amendment violate the Basic 
Structure of the Constitution by imposing 
reservation on unaided institutions?

 	Yes, it does.  Imposing reservation on unaided institutions 
violates the Basic Structure by stripping citizens of their 
fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) to carry on an 
occupation. T.M.A. Pai and Inamdar affirmed that the 
establishment and running of an educational institution falls 
under the right to an occupation.  The right to select students on 
the basis of merit is an essential feature of the right to establish 
and run an unaided institution.  Reservation is an unreasonable 
restriction that infringes this right by destroying the autonomy 
and essence of an unaided institution.  The effect of the 93rd 
Amendment is such that Article 19 is abrogated, leaving the 
Basic Structure altered.  To restore the Basic Structure, I sever 
the 93rd Amendment's reference to "unaided" institutions.  

See paras 132-182. 

4.	Whether the use of caste to identify SEBCs runs 
afoul of the casteless/classless society, in 
violation of Secularism. 

Sawhney I compels me to conclude that use of caste is 
valid.  It is said that if reservation in education is to stay, it 
should adhere to a basic tenet of Secularism:  it should not take 
caste into account.  As long as caste is a criterion, we will never 
achieve a casteless society.  Exclusively economic criteria should 
be used.  I urge the Government that for a period of ten years 
caste and other factors such as occupation/income/property 
holdings or similar measures of economic power may be taken 
into consideration and thereafter only economic criteria should 
prevail; otherwise we would not be able to achieve our 
constitutional goal of casteless and classless India.  

See paras 194, 195, 231, 248, 251. 
5.	Are Articles 15(4) and 15(5) mutually 
contradictory, such that 15(5) is 
unconstitutional?

 	I am able to read them harmoniously.  
See paras 252-256.

6.	Does Article 15(5)'s exemption of minority 
institutions from the purview of reservation 
violate Article 14 of the Constitution?

  	Given the inherent tension between Articles 29(2) and 30(1), 
I find that the overriding constitutional goal of realizing a 
casteless/classless society should serve as a tie-breaker.   We 
will take a step in the wrong direction if minority institutions 
(even those that are aided) are subject to reservation.  
See paras 268-269.
7)  Are the standards of review laid down by the U.S. 
Supreme Court applicable to our review of 
affirmative action under Art 15(5) and similar 
provisions?

The principles enunciated by the American Supreme Court, 
such as, "Suspect Legislation" "Narrow Tailoring" "Strict 
Scrutiny" and "Compelling State necessity" are not strictly 
applicable for challenging the impugned legislation.

Cases decided by other countries are not binding but do 
have great persuasive value.  Let the path to our constitutional 
goals be enlightened by experience, learning, knowledge and 
wisdom from any quarter.  In the words of Rigveda, let noble 
thoughts come to us from every side.
See para 183. 

8) 	With respect to OBC identification, was the 
Reservation Act's delegation of power to the 
Union Government excessive? 

It is not an excessive delegation.  With respect to this issue, 
I agree with the reasoning of the Chief Justice in his judgment. 

9) 	Is the impugned legislation invalid as it fails to 
set a time-limit for caste-based reservation?

It is not invalid because it fails to set a time-limit.  
See para 272. 

10) At what point is a student no longer 
Educationally Backward and thus no longer 
eligible for special provisions under 15(5)? 

Once a candidate graduates from a university, the said candidate 
is educationally forward and is ineligible for special benefits 
under Article 15(5) of the Constitution for post graduate and any 
further studies thereafter.  

See para 273. 

11.	Would it be reasonable to balance OBC 
reservation with societal interests by instituting 
OBC cut-off marks that are slightly lower than 
that of the general category? 

It is reasonable to balance reservation with other societal 
interests.  To maintain standards of excellence, cut off marks for 
OBCs should be set not more than 10 marks out of 100 below 
that of the general category.
See paras 274-278.

These Writ Petitions and Contempt Petition are accordingly 
disposed of.  In the facts and circumstances, the parties  are to 
bear their own costs.

