
Supreme Court of India
M.P.Electricity Board &amp; Ors vs Maiku Prasad on 2 September, 2008Author: ...........................J.
Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Aftab Alam
                                                                     1


                                          NON
                                      REPORTABLE

           IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
           CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION



            CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5425 OF 2008
         (Arising out of SLP (C) No. 23319 of 2007)

M.P. Electricity Board &amp; Ors.                                 ...
Appellants

VERSUS

Maiku Prasad                               ....Respondent

                         ORDER

1. Leave granted.

2.   On 13th of December, 2007, this Court issued notice on

     this Special Leave Petition and passed the following

     order :-

        "Learned counsel for the petitioners submits
        that the respondent has already been
        reinstated.
        Issue notice limited to the question of payment
        of 50 per cent of the back wages.
        In the meantime, execution proceedings are
        stayed."


                                                               1
                                                         2
3. From the office report dated 7th of August, 2008, it

  appears that as per an order passed by the learned

  Registrar of this Court dated 31st of March, 2008, Dasti

  notice was issued to the sole respondent and an affidavit

  of service has been filed by the petitioner stating therein

  that the sole respondent has already been served. In

  spite of service, no one appeared on his behalf at the

  time of hearing of the appeal.

4. Having heard the learned counsel for the appellant and

  considering the facts that the service of the respondent

  was terminated as he was unauthorisedly absent from

  duty from 15th of February, 1984 to 3rd of March, 1984

  and after the order of termination respondent had not

  worked for a long time with the appellant board till he

  was reinstated, we feel it appropriate to modify the

  award in question to the extent of payment of fifty per

  cent of back wages to the respondent instead of full back

  wages, as directed by the Labour Court and affirmed by

  the High Court.


                                                             2
                                                            3
5.    Accordingly we modify the award in question to the

above extent, that is to say, that fifty per cent back wages

shall be paid to the respondent instead of full back wages

as directed by the Labour Court and the High Court and

direct the appellant to pay such amount of back wages to

the respondent within four months from the date of supply

of a copy of this order. We keep it on record, as we have

already noted in our order dated 13th of December, 2007,

that the respondent has already been reinstated in service

by the appellant.

6.    Accordingly, the impugned Judgment of the High

Court is modified to the extent indicated above. The appeal

is thus disposed of. There will no order as to costs.


                                       ............................J.
                                     [TARUN CHATTERJEE]




                                       ...........................J.
                                      [AFTAB ALAM]
NEW DELHI
September 02, 2008.


                                                                3
4
    4

