
Supreme Court of India
Om Prakash vs State Of U.P on 22 January, 2008Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  145 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Om Prakash

RESPONDENT:
State of U.P.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 22/01/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
(Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.6188 of 2007)
DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J:	
1.		Leave granted.

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the order passed by a 
learned Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court dismissing 
the revision petition filed by the appellant under Section 397, 
read with Section 401 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1973 (in 
short `the Code').

3.	Challenge in the revision was to the order passed by 
a learned Sessions Judge in Criminal Appeal No.2060 of 1990 
by which the order of conviction and sentence, as recorded by 
the learned Additional CJM, was confirmed.

4.	Background facts in a nutshell are as follows:

	On getting information on 22.01.1990 that one Truck 
No.UP-93, 1665 of Minakshi Traders was being loaded at scrap 
yard of Jhansi with Cast Iron Grade-I illegally with the Cast 
Iron Grade-II, the inspector R.K. Rajput, along with Dy. 
Superintendent M.U. Farooki went to the spot and found a 
Truck No.UP-93-1665 near the Auction Hall which was loaded 
with Cast Iron Grade II.  Superintendent Incharge called the 
Head Constable 878 Taradat Sati and DSK Lala Ram. They 
were asked to climb up the truck and take a look, and after 
examining, they reported that some Cast Iron Grade-I was 
loaded in the truck.  At that point of time, the Contractor, the 
present appellant was also present near the Truck along with 
some persons.   The Contractor called his labourers and 
unloaded the Cast Iron Grade-I from the truck.  It was found 
that 22 carat Cast Iron Grade-I were without Tie Bars. Inside 
the truck approximately, 7 Tons of Cast Iron Grade-II were 
loaded. It was accepted that no Cast Iron Grade-I could have 
been loaded.  Necessary examination was done and it was 
found that the railway property, i.e. Cast Iron Grade-I was 
unauthorizedly being transported.  A complaint was lodged 
and after analysing the evidence on record, learned Additional 
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jhansi found the appellant guilty 
under Section 3 of the Railway Property (Unlawful Possession) 
Act, 1966 (in short `the Railway Act') and sentenced him to 
undergo imprisonment for one year with fine of Rs.1,000/- 
with default stipulations.  

5.	As noted above, an appeal before the learned 
Sessions Judge, Jhansi did not bring any relief to the 
appellant and so also was the revision before the High Court.

6.	Learned counsel for the appellant took the stand that 
the appellant was not the owner of the articles and he was 
only a labourer.  It was also submitted that the appellant has 
already undergone sentence of more than eight months and 
since the sentence is only one year, the same may be reduced 
to the period already undergone by the appellant.

7.	From the evidence on record, it was found that the 
presence of Cast Iron Grade-I has not been disputed. The 
stand presently taken is that somebody else was the auction 
purchaser and the appellant had no role to play.  But at all 
stages, it appears that the appellant was present near the 
truck, he was described as the contractor and in his presence 
the analysis was done, and from the material available on 
record, it is also clear that he, as the contractor, was asked to 
unload the articles and he had called his labourers to unload 
the articles.  

8.	Therefore, the finding that he was in unlawful 
possession of Cast Iron Grade-I is a finding which does not 
warrant interference.  Railway property, as defined in Section 
2, clause (d) of the Act reads as follows:

Section 2(d)	railway property includes 
any goods, money or valuable security or 
animal, belonging to, or in the charge or 
possession of, a railway administration.
	
9.	Section 3 deals with penalty for unlawful possession 
of railway property.  The same reads as follows:

	3.	Whoever is found, or is 
proved to have been, in possession of any 
railway property reasonably suspected of 
having been stolen or unlawfully obtained 
shall, unless he proves that the railway 
property came into his possession lawfully, be 
punishable-
	(a)	for the first offence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years, or with fine, or with both and in the 
absence of special and adequate reasons to be 
mentioned in the judgment of the court, such 
imprisonment shall not be less than one year 
and such fine shall not be less than one 
thousand rupees;
	(b)	for the second or a 
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years and also 
with fine and in the absence of special and 
adequate reasons to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such imprisonment 
shall not be less than two years and such fine 
shall not be less than two thousand rupees.
10.	In State of Maharashtra vs. Vishwanath Tukaram (1979 (4) 
SCC 23), it was observed that the following ingredients are 
necessary to bring in application of Section 3:

(i) 	The property in question should be 
railway property;
(ii)	It should be reasonably suspected of 
having been stolen or unlawfully obtained; and
(iii)	it should be found or proved that the 
accused was or had been in possession of that 
property.
11.	In the instant case, all the ingredients have been 
established.  So far as the sentence is concerned, for offence 
committed for the first time, a minimum punishment of one 
year has been prescribed.  That being so, the courts below 
have rightly imposed sentence of one year.	

12.	Above being the position, there is no merit in this 
appeal which is, accordingly, dismissed.

