
Supreme Court of India
Jayasingh vs State By Inspector Of Police on 15 February, 2008Bench: Altamas Kabir, J.M. Panchal
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  318 of 2008

PETITIONER:
JAYASINGH

RESPONDENT:
STATE BY INSPECTOR OF POLICE

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/02/2008

BENCH:
ALTAMAS KABIR &amp; J.M. PANCHAL

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R
(Arising out of SLP(Crl.) No.1505 of 2006)

	     Leave granted.
	The appellant was convicted under Section 302 of the Indian Penal 
Code and sentenced to life imprisonment, fine of Rs.1,000/- and six 
months imprisonment in case of default, by the First Additional 
Sessions Judge, Coimbatore.
	The appellant has challenged the aforesaid judgment and sentence 
on the ground that at the relevant point of time when the offence is 
said to have been committed, he was a juvenile and should have been 
tried under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection 
of Children) Act, 2000, (hereinafter referred as the 2000 Act).
	It is submitted on behalf of the respondent that such question had 
not been raised either before the Trial Court or before the High Court 
and that such point is being raised  for the first time before this Court.
	In our view, if the age of the appellant was below 18 years on the 
date of the  incident, then the very jurisdiction which was exercised by 
the courts below was erroneous having regard to the provisions of the 
2000 Act.
	It may be indicated that under the Juvenile Justice Act,1986, a male 
juvenile was defined to mean a person who had not completed sixteen 
years of age.  with the enactment of the 2000 Act under Section 2(k) 
the age limit was raised to 18 years.  Section 2(1) was subsequently 
amended in 2006 to define a Juvenile in conflict with law to mean a 
juvenile who is alleged to have committed an offence and has not 
completed eighteenth year of age as on the date of commission of 
such defence.
	Apart from the above amendment, Section 20 of 2000 Act was also 
amended by Section 14 of the Amendment Act of 2006, and Section 20 
as amended reads as under:-

	20. Special provision in respect of pending cases. - 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, all proceedings in 
respect of a juvenile pending in any court in any area on the date on 
which this Act comes into force in that area, shall be continued in that 
Court as if this Act had not been passed and if the Court finds that the 
juvenile has committed an offence, it shall record such finding and 
instead of passing any sentence in respect of the juvenile, forward the 
juvenile to the Board which shall pass orders in respect of that 
juvenile in accordance with the provisions of this Act as if it had been 
satisfied on inquiry under this Act that a juvenile has committed the 
offence.

      (Provided that the Board may, for any adequate and special reason 
to be mentioned in the order, review the case and pass appropriate 
order in the interest of such juvenile.

     Explanation.  In all pending cases including trial, revision, appeal 
or any other criminal proceedings in respect of a juvenile in conflict 
with law, in any court, the determination of juvenility of such a 
juvenile shall be in terms of clause (1) of section 2, even if the juvenile 
ceases to be so on or before the date of commencement of this Act 
and the provisions of this Act shall apply as if the said provisions had 
been in force, for all purposes and at all material times when the 
alleged offence was committed.

	A glance at the above provisions will indicate that the 
provisions of the 2000 Act were made applicable to juveniles and 
juveniles who were in conflict with law but were below the age of 18 
years prior to coming into operation of the 2000 Act.

	In other words, the appellant, who claims to be 16 years, 6 
months and 9 days on the date of the incident on the strength of his 
School Leaving Certificate, would be entitled to the benefit of Section 
20 of the 2000 Act.  In addition to the above, we find from the copy of 
the appellant's Bisrth Certificate annexed to the Affidavit filed on 
behalf of the State, that on the date of the offence the appellant was 
17 years 10 months and 26 days,  which also attracts the amended 
provisions of Section 20 of the 2000 Act.
	In that view of the matter, the judgment under appeal, as far 
the appellant is concerned, cannot be sustained and is set aside.  
Since the appellant was a juvenile in terms of the 2000 Act on the date 
of the incident, the maximum punishment that could have been 
awarded to him is detention in a special home for a period of 3 years 
in terms of Section 15(g).
	Since we are informed that the appellant has already 
undergone imprisonment of 7= years on the basis of the sentence 
passed by the Sessions  Court, we reduce the sentence as passed, to 
a period of three years in view of Section 15(g) of the 2000 Act.  Since 
he has already undergone imprisonment  for the said period, the 
appellant be released forthwith.
	The appeal is allowed. 

