
Supreme Court of India
Sweet Confectionary vs S.M. Khot &amp; Ors on 8 February, 2008Bench: C.K. Thakker, D.K. Jain
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1186 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Sweet Confectionary

RESPONDENT:
S.M. Khot &amp; Ors.

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 08/02/2008

BENCH:
C.K. THAKKER &amp; D.K. JAIN

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
                             
O R D E R
(Arising out of SLP(C) NO.  4200/2007)								                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
	Leave granted.

	The present appeal arises out of an interim order passed by the High Court.  From the 
record, it is clear that Labour Court passed an award in favour of respondent-
employees holding that provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 
(for short, `the Act') had not been complied with and granted relief by reinstating the 
respondents herein with full back wages.  The Industrial Court confirmed that order.  
Being aggrieved by the  said orders, the appellant approached the High Court by filing 
the writ petition.  The High Court issued rule nisi, but rejected the  application for 
stay.  The Division Bench of the High Court confirmed that order against which the 
present appeal is filed by way of special leave to appeal.  Notice was issued and ad-
interim stay was granted.

	Heard learned counsel for the parties.

	Learned counsel for the appellant submits that an appropriate direction may be issued 
to the High Court so that the main matter may be disposed of.  Meanwhile, ad-interim 
relief granted by this Court may be continued.

..2/-

 :2:
	Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, strongly objects to the prayer 
of continuation of relief stating that if the High Court was satisfied and even if this 
Court is satisfied about the prima facie case by the appellant, an appropriate relief has 
to be granted to the workmen as provided under Section 17-B of the Act.

	On the facts and in the circumstances of the case and, particularly, when rule nisi is 
issued, it would be appropriate, if we request the High Court to dispose of the  main 
matter as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a period of six months.  Ordered 
accordingly.   

	The High Court will, however, hear the parties and pass an appropriate order 
exercising powers under  Section 17-B of the Act.        	

	The appeal is disposed of without observing anything on merits.  It is open to the 
parties to raise all contentions.

