
Supreme Court of India
Baswanappa Patil vs Sivakumar Ptail &amp; Anr on 15 February, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, V.S. Sirpurkar
           CASE NO.:
Transfer Petition (crl.)  307-308 of 2007

PETITIONER:
BASWANAPPA PATIL

RESPONDENT:
SIVAKUMAR PTAIL &amp; ANR

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/02/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; V.S. SIRPURKAR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

TRANSFER  PETITION (CRIMINAL)   NOS. 307-308  OF 2007


	The petitioner by this application filed under Section 406 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure has sought for transfer of the criminal complaint being ST No. 294/2007, 
titled as Shivakumar Patil vs. Baswanappa patil, as also the criminal compliant being 
ST No.523/2007, titled as Udayashree Patil vs. Baswanappa patil, both pending before 
the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kollam, Kerala, to the Court of Judicial 
Magistrate, First Class, Tandur, Rangareddy District in the Sate of A.P.  

	The relationship between the petitioner and the respondent is that of father and son.  
Respondent No.2 is the  wife of Respondent No.1. They have filed the aforementioned 
two complaint petitions against the petitioner for commission

					-2-
of alleged offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, which as 
noticed hereinbefore, are pending in the Court of Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Kollam in the State of Kerala.  From the averments made in the said transfer 
application as also the documents annexed thereto it appears that the respondents are 
also residents of Tendur in the District of Rangareddy, A.P. 
	Having regard to the relationship between the parties and keeping in view the 
aforementioned fact, we are of the opinion that in the interest of justice the 
aforementioned two cases be transferred from the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Kollam, Kerala to the Court of Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Tandur, Rangareddy 
District in the Sate of A.P.
	However, the transferee Court, keeping in view the fact that the respondents are 
ordinarily residents of Kollam in the State of Kerala, shall accommodate them as far 
as possible and, if expedient, shall take up both the matters for hearing on the same 
date.  
	The transfer petitions are allowed accordingly.

