
Supreme Court of India
State Of Maharashtra vs Bharat Shanti Lal Shah &amp; Ors on 1 September, 2008Author: . M Sharma
Bench: K.G. Balakrishnan, R.V. Raveendran, Mukundakam Sharma
                                                                      REPORTABLE

                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

               CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS.                  OF 2008
            (Arising out of S.L.P. (Crl.) Nos. 753-756 of 2004)


State of Maharashtra                                    .... Appellant

                                  Versus


Bharat Shanti Lal Shah &amp; Ors.                          .... Respondents



                                JUDGMENT

Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J.


1. Leave granted.


2. In all these appeals the issue that falls for our consideration is the

   constitutional validity of the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime

   Act, 1999 (for short the `MCOCA' or the `Act') on the ground that the

   State Legislature did not have the legislative competence to enact such a
   law and also that the aforesaid law is unreasonable and is violative of the

   provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.



3. Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were arrested under the provisions of the

   MCOCA and cases were registered against them. Being aggrieved by

   the aforesaid arrest and registration of cases both of them filed separate

   writ petitions being Criminal Writ Petition No. 1738/2002 and Criminal

   Writ Petition No. 110/2003 respectively in the Bombay High Court

   challenging the constitutional validity of the MCOCA, particularly the

   provisions of Section 2(d), (e) and (f) and that of Sections 3, 4 and 13 to

   16 and Section 21(5) of the MCOCA. Respondent no. 1 also filed a writ

   petition of similar nature being Criminal Writ Petition No. 27/2003.

      The Bombay High Court heard the above mentioned writ petitions

together and passed a common judgment and order on 05.03.2003 whereby

it upheld the constitutional validity of Section 2(d), (e) and (f) and also the

provisions of Sections 3 and 4 but struck down Sections 13 to 16 as

unconstitutional as being beyond the legislative competence of the State

Legislature. The High Court held that the Parliament alone has the power

to make law in that regard as provided for under Entry 31 of List I of




                                     2
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution and that already the Indian Telegraph

Act, 1885, a Central Act was holding the field. The High Court also struck

down sub-section (5) of Section 21 of the MCOCA holding that the same

was violative of provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Being

aggrieved by the aforesaid common order the State of Maharashtra has filed

the present appeals.


4. Learned senior counsel appearing for the parties advanced elaborate

   arguments on the aforesaid issues, but before we deal with and discuss

   the same, it would be necessary for us to refer to the relevant provisions

   of the concerned Central and the State Legislations.



5. The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (for short the `Telegraph Act') was

   passed as a Central Act in 1885 and the said Act came into force on 1st

   October, 1885. The word `telegraph' in the said Act is defined to mean

   any appliance, instrument, material or apparatus used or capable of use

   for transmission or reception of signs, signals, writing, images, and

   sounds or intelligence of any nature by wire, visual or other elector-

   magnetic emissions. By enacting Section 4 in the said Act the Central




                                    3
Government has been given exclusive privilege in establishing,

maintaining and working telegraphs. The power to grant a licence on

such conditions and in considerations of such payments as it thinks fit, to

any person to establish, maintain or work a telegraph in any part within

India is also vested with the Central Government. Section 5 of the said

Act gives power to the Central Government as well as to the State

Government or any officer specifically authorized in that behalf by the

Central or the State Government to take temporary possession of any

telegraph established, maintained or worked by any person, licensed

under the Act, provided there is an occurrence of any public emergency

or there is a case of public safety and when such authority is satisfied

that one such pre-condition arises and that it is necessary to act in a case

of public emergency or maintaining of public safety. Section 5(2) of the

Act provides that on the occurrence of any public emergency, or in the

interest of public safety the Central or the State Government or any

officer specially authorized in that behalf by the Central or the State

Government may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient to do so in

the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the

State, friendly relations with foreign states or public order or for




                                  4
   preventing incitement to the commission of offence and for the reasons

   to be recorded in writing by order, direct that any message or class of

   messages to or from any person or class of persons, or relating to any

   particular subject, brought for transmission by or transmitted or received

   by any telegraphs, shall not be transmitted, or shall be intercepted or

   detained, or shall be disclosed to the Government making the order or an

   officer thereof mentioned in the order.


6. The Telegraph Act is an existing law (as defined in Article 366 (10) of

   the Constitution) with respect to the matters enumerated in Entry 31 of

   List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution. Entry 31 empowers

   the Central Legislature to enact a law in respect of posts and telegraph,

   telephones,   wireless,   broadcasting       and   other   like   forms   of

   communication.     The Telegraph Act, which is an enactment passed

   before the commencement of the Constitution, deals with the aforesaid

   subjects enumerated in Entry 31 of List I.


7. The Maharashtra State Legislature enacted a State legislation under the

   name of Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 which




                                    5
came into force on 24th February, 1999.    The Statement of Objects and

Reasons for enacting the said Act reads as under:

   "Organised crime has for quite some years now come up as a
   very serious threat to our society. It knows no national
   boundaries and is fueled by illegal wealth generated by contract
   killings, extortion, smuggling in contrabands, illegal trade in
   narcotics, kidnapping for ransom, collection of protection
   money and money laundering, etc. The illegal wealth and
   black money generated by the organised crime is very huge and
   has serious adverse effect on our economy. It is seen that the
   organised criminal syndicates make a common cause with
   terrorist gangs and foster narco terrorism which extend beyond
   the national boundaries. There is reason to believe that
   organised criminal gangs are operating in the State and thus,
   there is immediate need to curb their activities.


   It is also noticed that the organised criminals make extensive
   use of wire and oral communications in their criminal
   activities. The interception of such communications to obtain
   evidence of the commission of crimes or to prevent their
   commission is an indispensable aid to law enforcement and the
   administration of justice.


   2.     The existing legal framework i.e. the penal and
   procedural laws and the adjudicatory system are found to be
   rather inadequate to curb or control the menace of organised
   crime. Government has, therefore, decided to enact a special
   law with stringent and deterrent provisions including in certain
   circumstances power to intercept wire, electronic or oral
   communication to control the menace of the organised crime."




                                6
      According to its preamble, the said Act was enacted to make specific

provisions for prevention and control of, and for coping with, criminal

activity by organised crime syndicate or gang and for matters connected

therewith or incidental thereto.


8. Section 2 of the MCOCA contains the definitions. The word "abet" is

   defined in clause (a) of sub-Section (1) to mean and include the

   communication or association with any person with the actual

   knowledge or having reason to believe that such person is engaged in

   assisting in any manner, an organized crime syndicate, the passing on or

   publication of, without any lawful authority any information likely to

   assist the organized crime syndicate and the passing on or publication of

   or distribution of any document or matter obtained from the organized

   crime syndicate and also rendering of any assistance whether financial or

   otherwise, to the organised crime syndicate. Clause (d) of sub-Section

   (1) defines the expression "continuing unlawful activity" to mean an

   activity prohibited by law for the time being in force, which is a

   cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment of three years of more,

   undertaken either singly or jointly, as a member of an organized crime




                                   7
   syndicate or on behalf of such syndicate in respect of which more than

   one charge sheets have been filed before a competent court within the

   preceding period of ten years and that court has taken cognizance of such

   offence. Clause (e) of sub-Section (1) defines the expression "organised

   crime" to mean any continuing unlawful activity by an individual, singly

   or jointly, either as a member of an organised crime syndicate or on

   behalf of such syndicate, by use of violence or threat of violence or

   intimidation or coercion, or other unlawful means, with the objective of

   gaining pecuniary benefits, or gaining undue economic or other

   advantage for himself or any other person or promoting insurgency. The

   term "organised crime syndicate" is defined under clause (f) of sub-

   Section (1) to mean a group of two or more persons who, acting either

   singly or collectively, as a syndicate or gang indulge in activities of

   organised crime.


9. Section 3 provides the punishment for organised crime. It states that (i)

   whoever commits an offence of organised crime, (ii) whoever conspires

   or attempts to commit or advocates, abets or knowingly facilitate the

   commission of an organised crime or any act preparatory to organised




                                   8
  crime, (iii) whoever harbours or conceals or attempts to harbour or

  conceal any member of an organised crime syndicate, (iv) any person

  who is a member of an organised crime syndicate and (v) whoever holds

  any property derived or obtained from commission of an organised

  crime, shall be punished as provided in the said section. Section 4

  provides punishment for possessing unaccountable wealth on behalf of a

  member of organised crime syndicate.


10.Section 13 of the MCOCA deals with the power of the State Government

  to appoint the competent authority. As per the said section the State

  Government may appoint any of its officer, in Home Department, not

  below the rank of Secretary to the Government, to be the competent

  authority for the purposes of Section 14. Section 14 empowers a police

  officer not below the rank of the Superintendent of Police supervising

  the investigation of an organised crime under the aforesaid Act to submit

  an application in writing to the competent authority for an order

  authorizing or approving the interception of wire, electronic or oral

  communication by the investigating officer, when such interception may

  provide or has provided evidence of any offence involving an organised




                                  9
   crime. Sub-Sections (2) to (13) of Section 14 lay down the detailed

   procedure therefore as also the requirements to be fulfilled before

   approval is granted. Section 14, therefore, authorizes the interception of

   wire, electronic or oral communication, subject to certain conditions and

   safeguards laid down therein.     Section 15 requires constitution of a

   review committee to review every order passed by the competent

   authority under Section 14.     Section 16 imposes certain restrictions

   regarding interception and disclosure of wire, electronic or oral

   communication. It prohibits the interception and also disclosure of wire,

   electronic or oral communication by any police officer except as

   otherwise specifically provided, and makes any violation of the

   provision punishable.


11.There is a power of forfeiture and attachment of property of the person

   convicted under MCOCA under Section 20. Sub-section (1) of Section

   21 of the MCOCA lays down that notwithstanding anything contained in

   the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short "the Code") or in any

   other law, every offence punishable under MCOCA shall be deemed to

   be a cognizable offence within the meaning of clause (c) of Section 2 of




                                    10
   the Code and "cognizable case" as defined in that clause would be

   construed accordingly.    Sub-section (2) of Section 21 provides that

   Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to a case involving an

   offence punishable under the Act subject to certain modifications. Sub-

   section (5) of Section 21 provides that notwithstanding anything

   contained in the Code, the accused would not be granted bail if it is

   noticed by the Court that he was on bail in an offence under the Act, or

   under any other Act, on the date of the offence in question.



12.Mr. Shekhar Nafade, learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant

   -State of Maharashtra drew our attention to the abovementioned

   provisions of the Telegraph Act as also to the abovementioned

   provisions of the MCOCA in support of his submission that all the

   provisions of MCOCA, the constitutional validity of which is challenged

   are valid. It was submitted by him that the aforesaid provisions, namely,

   Section 2(d), (e) and (f) and Sections 13 to 16 and sub-Section (5) of

   Section 21 constitutional validity of which was challenged are legal and

   valid as they are covered by Entry 1 and 2 of List II of the Seventh




                                    11
   Schedule and also under Entry 1, 2 and 3 of List III of the Seventh

   Schedule, which read as under:

      Entry 1 List II: Public order (but not including the use of any
      naval, military or air force or any other armed force of the
      Union of any other force subject to the control of the Union or
      of any contingent or unit thereof in aid of the civil power).

      Entry 2 List II: Police (including railway and village police)
      subject to the provisions of entry 2A of List I.

      Entry 1 List III: Criminal Law, including all matters included in
      the Indian Penal code at the commencement of this
      Constitution but excluding offences against laws with respect
      to any of the matters specified in List I or List II and excluding
      the use of naval, military or air forces or any other armed forces
      of the Union in aid of the civil power.

      Entry 2 List III: Criminal procedure, including all matters
      included in the Code of Criminal Procedure at the
      commencement of this Constitution.

      Entry 12 List III: Evidence and oaths; recognition of laws,
      public acts and records, and judicial proceedings.



13.It was submitted by him that the provisions of MCOCA create and define

   a new offence of organised crime under Section 2(1) (e) which is made

   punishable under Section 3 of the MCOCA and that to aid detection and

   investigation of such an offence and to provide evidence of any offence

   involving organised crime, interception of wire, electronic and oral




                                    12
communication is necessary.       He submitted that the provisions of

Sections 13 to 16, facilitate the detection and investigation of the offence

of organised crime, and the State's legislative competence to enact such

provisions was traceable to Entry 1 and 2 in List II and Entry 1, 2 and 12

in List III of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. He pointed out that

the duty of police officers is to collect intelligence regarding commission

of cognizable offences or plans/designs to commit such offences, to

prevent the commission of offences, and to detect and apprehend

offenders (See Section 23 of Police Act, 1861 and Section 64 of Bombay

Police Act, 1951). He also submitted that the grounds for interception of

the communication under the State Law are different from the grounds

covered by Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act, inasmuch as the State law

authorizes the interception as it is intended to prevent the commission of

an organised crime or to collect the evidence of such an organised crime.

He, therefore, contented that the constitutional validity cannot be

questioned on the ground of want of legislative competence of the State

Legislature to enact such a provision.


                                  13
14.It was further submitted that Entries in List I, II and III must receive a

      broad and liberal construction. Reference to the doctrine of pith and

      substance was also made.


15.It was also contended that the findings recorded by the High Court with

      regard to the repugnancy of provisions of Sections 13 to 16 of the

      MCOCA have been arrived at by misconstruing the provisions of the

      Central Act as also the State Act. The learned counsel for appellant drew

      our attention to the findings recorded in paragraph 48 of the impugned

      judgment of the High Court which contains a comparative chart on the

      basis of which the High Court has come to the conclusion that there was

      repugnancy. It was pointed out that the chart does not give a clear

      picture of the relevant statutory provisions and contained several flaws.



16.      Mr. Dushyant A. Dave, learned senior counsel appearing for

      Respondent No.1 and Mr. Manoj Goel, learned counsel appearing for

      Respondent No.3, however, refuted the aforesaid submissions while

      contending that the aforesaid provisions, namely Sections 13 to 16 and

      sub-Section (5) of Section 21 are ultra vires Article 246 of the




                                       14
      Constitution of India. It was submitted by them that the subject and the

      area which is dealt by the MCOCA, enacted by the State Legislature are

      governed and covered exclusively by Entry 31 of List I in regard to

      which parliament alone has exclusive competence, and that being so, the

      said provisions enacted by a state legislature are ultra vires the

      Constitution. It was also submitted that the said provisions are not only

      beyond the legislative competence of the state legislature but they also

      infringe upon the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part III of the

      Constitution as the said provisions are violative of Articles 14 and 21 of

      the Constitution and, therefore, the said provisions are to be declared

      ultra vires the Constitution on both the counts.


17.In addition, Mr. Manoj Goel Counsel for the Respondent No. 3

      submitted that Section 2 (d), (e) and (f) and Sections 3 and 4 of the

      MCOCA are constitutionally invalid as they are ultra virus being

      violative of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution.



18.                But we find that no cross appeal was filed by any of the

      respondents against the order of the High Court upholding the




                                        15
   constitutional validity of provisions of section 2(d), (e) and (f) and also

   that of Sections 3 and 4 of the MCOCA. During the course of hearing,

   Mr. Goel, the counsel appearing for one of the respondents herein tried

   to contend that the aforesaid provisions of Section 2(d), (e) and (f) of the

   MCOCA are unconstitutional on the ground that they violate the

   requirement of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution and that they make

   serious inroads into the fundamental rights by treating unequals as equals

   and are unsustainably vague. Since such issues were not specifically

   raised by filing an appeal and since only a passing reference is made on

   the said issue in the short three page affidavit filed by the respondent No.

   3, it is not necessary for us to examine the said issue as it was sought to

   be raised more specifically in the argument stage only.



19.Even otherwise when the said definitions as existing in Section 2 (d), (e)

   and (f) of the MCOCA are read and understood with the object and

   purpose of the Act which is to make special provisions for prevention

   and control of organised crime it is clear that they are worded to

   subserve and achieve the said object and purpose of the Act. There is no

   vagueness as the definitions defined with clarity what it meant by




                                     16
continuing unlawful activity, organised crime and also organised crime

syndicate. As the provisions treat all those covered by it in a like manner

and does not suffer from the vice of class legislation they cannot be said

to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. With respect to Section

3 of MCOCA, even before the High Court the attack was in particular in

respect of the provisions of Section 3 (3) and (5) on the ground that the

requirement of mens rea is done away with, thus automatically rendering

a person without any intention or knowledge liable for punishment. It is

a well settled position of law insofar as criminal law is concerned that in

such provisions mens rea is always presumed as integral part of penal

offence or section unless it is specifically and expressly or by necessary

intendment excluded by the legislature. No such exclusion is found in

sub-sections (3) and (5) of Section 3. As held by the High Court, if the

provisions are read in the following manner no injury, as alleged, would

be caused:

   "3(3). Whoever (intentionally) harbours or conceals or attempts
   to harbor or conceal any member of an organized crime
   syndicate shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
   which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to
   imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to a fine, subject
   to a minimum fine of rupees five lacs."


                                 17
      "3(5). Whoever (knowingly) holds any property derived or
      obtained from commission of an organized crime or which has
      been acquired through the organized crime syndicate funds
      shall be punishable with a term which shall not be less than
      three years but which may extent to imprisonment for life and
      shall also be liable to fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees
      two lacs."



      As far as section 4 of MCOCA is concerned the challenge was made

before the High Court on the ground that the words "at any time" in Section

4 makes an act which was not a crime prior to coming into force of the

MCOCA, a crime, thus, making the provision retrospective, being violative

of Article 20 of the Constitution. A Perusal of the enactment along with the

object and purpose reveals that it is only prospective and not retrospective

and as held by the High Court the words "at any time" should be read to

mean at any time after coming into force of MCOCA, the section should be

read as under:


      "4. Punishment for possessing unaccountable wealth on
      behalf of member of organized syndicate.--If any person on
      behalf of a member of an organized crime syndicate is, or, at
      any time (after coming into force of this Act) has been, in
      possession of movable or immovable property which he can not
      satisfactorily account for, he shall be punishable with
      imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three
      years which may extent to ten years and shall also be liable to
      fine, subject to a minimum fine of rupees one lac and such



                                    18
      property shall also be liable for attachment and forfeiture, as
      provided by Section 20."

20.After examining the impugned judgment in depth on the issue of

   constitutional validity of Section 2 (d), (e) and (f) and also Section 3 and

   4 of MCOCA we are in accord with the findings arrived at by the High

   Court that the aforesaid provisions cannot be said to be ultra vires the

   Constitution and we do not find any reason to take a different view that

   what is taken by the High Court while upholding the validity of the

   aforesaid provisions.


21.In the light of the aforesaid, we are required to answer the issues which

   are specifically raised before us, relating to the constitutional validity of

   Sections 13 to 16 as also Section 21 (5) of MCOCA, on the ground of

   lack of legislative competence and also being violative of the

   fundamental rights guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or of any

   other constitutional provision.


22.Before we proceed to record our findings and conclusions in relation to

   the contentions raised before us it would be necessary to survey and



                                     19
  notice some of the provisions of Constitution and well established

  doctrine and principle which are relevant for the purpose of our decision.



23.Chapter 1 of part XI of the Constitution deals with the subject of

  distribution of legislative powers of the Parliament and the legislature of

  the States. Article 245 of the Constitution provides that the Parliament

  may make laws for the whole or any part of the territory of India, and the

  Legislature of a State may make laws for the whole or any part of the

  State. Article 246 of the Constitution relates to the subject matter of

  laws made by the Parliament and State Legislatures. It declares that the

  Parliament has the exclusive power to make laws with respect to any of

  the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh Schedule. The

  Legislature of any State would have powers to make laws with respect to

  any of the matters mentioned in List II, subject to the power of the

  parliament in regard to List I matters and the power of the Parliament

  and the State Legislature in respect of List III matters. List III

  enumerates the matters in respect of which both Parliament and State

  Legislatures have power to enact laws.


                                   20
24.It is a well established rule of interpretation that the entries in the list

   being fields of legislation must receive liberal construction inspired by a

   broad and generous spirit and not in a narrow pedantic sense. Each

   general word should extend to all ancillary and subsidiary matters which

   can fairly and reasonably be comprehended within it. In Navinchandra

   Mafatlal v. CIT reported in AIR 1955 SC 58 this Court observed as

   under:

      "6....................As pointed out by Gwyer, C.J. in United
      Provinces v. Atiqa Begum (1940) FC R 110 at p. 134 none of
      the items in the Lists is to be read in a narrow or restricted
      sense and that each general word should be held to extend to all
      ancillary or subsidiary matters which can fairly and reasonably
      be said to be comprehended in it. It is, therefore, clear -- and it
      is acknowledged by Chief Justice Chagla -- that in construing
      an entry in a List conferring legislative powers the widest
      possible construction according to their ordinary meaning must
      be put upon the words used therein............The cardinal rule
      of interpretation, however, is that words should be read in their
      ordinary, natural and grammatical meaning subject to this rider
      that in construing words in a constitutional enactment
      conferring legislative power the most liberal construction
      should be put upon the words so that the same may have effect
      in their widest amplitude."



      Similar were the observations of a five Judges' Bench of this Court in

Godfrey Phillips India Ltd. v. State of U.P., reported in (2005) 2 SCC

515, which are as follows:


                                     21
      "49............Where there is the possibility of legislative
      overlap, courts have resolved the issue according to settled
      principles of construction of entries in the legislative lists.

      50. The first of such settled principles is that legislative entries
      should be liberally interpreted, that none of the items in the list
      is to be read in a narrow or restricted sense and that each
      general word should be held to extend to ancillary or subsidiary
      matters which can fairly and reasonably be said to be
      comprehended in it (United Provinces v. Atiqa Begam (1940)
      FCR 110, Western India Theatres Ltd. v. Cantonment Board
      1959 Supp (2) SCR 63, SCR at p. 69 and Elel Hotels &amp;
      Investments Ltd. v. Union of India (1989) 3 SCC 698)."



25.It is also a cardinal rule of interpretation that there shall always be a

   presumption of constitutionality in favour of a statue and while

   construing such statue every legally permissible effort should be made to

   keep the statue within the competence of State legislature. In M/s

   Burrakur Coal Co. Ltd. v. The Union of India and others reported in

   1962 (1) SCR 44 this Court held the same in the following manner:


         "24.......Where the validity of a law made by a competent
         authority is challenged in a Court of law that court is bound
         to presume in favour of its validty.           Further while
         considering the validity of the law the court will not
         consider itself restricted to the pleadings of the State and
         would be free to satisfy itself whether under any provision
         of the Constitution the law can be sustained......."

                                     22
26.In CST v. Radhakrishnan           (1979) 2 SCC 249 this Court while

   dealing with the question of constitutional validity of a statute held that

   the presumption is always on the constitutionality and the burden is upon

   the person who attacks it to show that there has been transgression of

   constitutional principles. It was held in that decision that for sustaining

   the constitutionality of an Act, a Court may take into consideration

   matters of common knowledge, reports, preamble, history of the times,

   object of the legislation and all other facts which are relevant and that it

   must always be presumed that the legislature understands and correctly

   appreciate the need of its own people and that discrimination, if any, is

   based on adequate grounds and considerations.


27.In this regard we may also refer to a three Judges' Bench decision of this

   Court titled Greater Bombay Cooperative Bank Ltd. v. United Yarn

   Tex (P) Ltd. &amp; Others reported in (2007) 6 SCC 236. In the said

   decision one of the issues that was raised was "whether the State

   Legislature is competent to enact legislation in respect of cooperative

   societies incidentally transacting business of banking, in the light of

   Entry 32, List II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution."      While




                                     23
deciding the said issue reference was made and reliance was placed on

the following passage contained in the earlier decision of this Court in

State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillaries Limited reported in (1997) 2 SCC

453, about the nature of approach which the court should adopt while

examining the constitutional validity of a provision (vide para 85) :

   "The approach of the court, while examining the challenge to
   the constitutionality of an enactment, is to start with the
   presumption of constitutionality. The court should try to
   sustain its validity to the extent possible. It should strike down
   the enactment only when it is not possible to sustain it. The
   court should not approach the enactment with a view to pick
   holes or to search for defects of drafting, much less
   inexactitude of language employed. Indeed, any such defects of
   drafting should be ignored out as part of the attempt to sustain
   the validity/ constitutionality of the enactment. After all, an Act
   made by the legislature represents the will of the people and
   that cannot be lightly interfered with. The unconstitutionality
   must be plainly and clearly established before an enactment is
   declared as void. The same approach holds good while
   ascertaining the intent and purpose of an enactment or its scope
   and application......."

   "The court must recognise the fundamental nature and
   importance of legislative process and accord due regard and
   deference to it, just as the legislature and the executive are
   expected to show due regard and deference to the judiciary. It
   cannot also be forgotten that our Constitution recognises and
   gives effect to the concept of equality between the three wings
   of the State and the concept of `checks and balances' inherent
   in such scheme."


                                  24
28.One of the proven methods of examining the legislative competence of

  an enactment is by the application of doctrine of pith and substance. This

  doctrine is applied when the legislative competence of the legislature

  with regard to a particular enactment is challenged with reference to the

  entries in various lists. If there is a challenge to the legislative

  competence the courts will try to ascertain the pith and substance of such

  enactment on a scrutiny of the Act in question. In this process, it is

  necessary for the courts to go into and examine the true character of the

  enactment, its object, its scope and effect to find out whether the

  enactment in question is genuinely referable to the field of legislation

  allotted to the respective Legislature under the constitutional scheme.

  The said doctrine has come to be established in India and is recognized

  in various pronouncements of this Court as also of the High Courts.

  Where a challenge is made to the constitutional validity of a particular

  State Act with reference to a subject mentioned in any entry in List I, the

  court has to look to the substance of the State Act and on such analysis

  and examination, if it is found that in the pith and substance, it falls

  under an entry in the State List but there is only an incidental

  encroachment on topics in the Union List, the State Act would not




                                   25
   become invalid merely because there is incidental encroachment on any

   of the topics in the Union List.


29.A five Judges' Bench of this court in the case of A.S. Krishna v. State

   of Madras, reported in 1957 SCR 399, held as under:

      "8..........But then, it must be remembered that we are
      construing a federal Constitution. It is of the essence of such a
      Constitution that there should be a distribution of the
      legislative powers of the Federation between the Centre and the
      Provinces. The scheme of distribution has varied with different
      Constitutions, but even when the Constitution enumerates
      elaborately the topics on which the Centre and the States could
      legislate, some overlapping of the fields of legislation is
      inevitable. The British North America Act, 1867, which
      established a federal Constitution for Canada, enumerated in
      Sections 91 and 92 the topics on which the Dominion and the
      Provinces could respectively legislate. Notwithstanding that the
      lists were framed so as to be fairly full and comprehensive, it
      was not long before it was found that the topics enumerated in
      the two sections overlapped, and the Privy Council had time
      and again to pass on the constitutionality of laws made by the
      Dominion and Provincial legislatures. It was in this situation
      that the Privy Council evolved the doctrine, that for deciding
      whether an impugned legislation was intra vires, regard must
      be had to its pith and substance. That is to say, if a statute is
      found in substance to relate to a topic within the competence of
      the legislature, it should be held to be intra vires, even though
      it might incidentally trench on topics not within its legislative
      competence. The extent of the encroachment on matters beyond
      its competence may be an element in determining whether the
      legislation is colourable, that is, whether in the guise of making
      a law on a matter within it competence, the legislature is, in
      truth, making a law on a subject beyond its competence. But
      where that is not the position, then the fact of encroachment
      does not affect the vires of the law even as regards the area of
      encroachment."


                                      26
            Again a five Judges' bench of this court while discussing the said

doctrine in Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab (1994) 3 SCC 569 observed as

under:

         "60. This doctrine of `pith and substance' is applied when the
         legislative competence of a legislature with regard to a
         particular enactment is challenged with reference to the entries
         in the various lists i.e. a law dealing with the subject in one list
         is also touching on a subject in another list. In such a case,
         what has to be ascertained is the pith and substance of the
         enactment. On a scrutiny of the Act in question, if found, that
         the legislation is in substance one on a matter assigned to the
         legislature enacting that statute, then that Act as a whole must
         be held to be valid notwithstanding any incidental trenching
         upon matters beyond its competence i.e. on a matter included in
         the list belonging to the other legislature. To say differently,
         incidental encroachment is not altogether forbidden."

30.Though it is true that the State Legislature would not have power to

   legislate upon any of the matters enumerated in the Union List but as per

   the doctrine of Pith and Substance there could not be any dispute with

   regard to the fact that if it could be shown that the area and subject of the

   legislation is also covered within the purview of the entry of the State

   List and the Concurrent List, in that event incidental encroachment to an

   entry in the Union List will not make a law invalid and such an




                                        27
  incidental encroachment will not make the legislation ultra vires the

  Constitution.


31. In Bharat Hydro Power Corpn. Ltd. v. State of Assam (2004) 2 SCC

  553 the Doctrine of pith and substance came to be considered, when after

  referring to the catena of decisions of this Court on the doctrine it is laid

  down as under:

     "18. It is likely to happen from time to time that enactment
     though purporting to deal with a subject in one list touches also
     on a subject in another list and prima facie looks as if one
     legislature is impinging on the legislative field of another
     legislature. This may result in a large number of statutes being
     declared unconstitutional because the legislature enacting law
     may appear to have legislated in a field reserved for the other
     legislature. To examine whether a legislation has impinged on
     the field of other legislatures, in fact or in substance, or is
     incidental, keeping in view the true nature of the enactment, the
     courts have evolved the doctrine of "pith and substance" for the
     purpose of determining whether it is legislation with respect to
     matters in one list or the other. Where the question for
     determination is whether a particular law relates to a particular
     subject mentioned in one list or the other, the courts look into
     the substance of the enactment. Thus, if the substance of the
     enactment falls within the Union List then the incidental
     encroachment by the enactment on the State List would not
     make it invalid. This principle came to be established by the
     Privy Council when it determined appeals from Canada or
     Australia involving the question of legislative competence of
     the federation or the States in those countries. This doctrine
     came to be established in India and derives its genesis from the
     approach adopted by the courts including the Privy Council in



                                    28
      dealing with controversies arising in other federations. For
      applying the principle of "pith and substance" regard is to be
      had (i) to the enactment as a whole, (ii) to its main objects, and
      (iii) to the scope and effect of its provisions. For this see
      Southern Pharmaceuticals &amp; Chemicals v. State of Kerala
      (1981) 4 SCC 391, State of Rajasthan v. G. Chawla AIR 1959
      SC 544, Thakur Amar Singhji v. State of Rajasthan AIR 1955
      SC 504, Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co. Ltd. v. Union of
      India (1983) 4 SCC 166 and Vijay Kumar Sharma v. State of
      Karnataka (1990) 2 SCC 562. In the last-mentioned case it was
      held: (SCC p. 576, para 15)
          "15. (3) Where a law passed by the State Legislature
          while being substantially within the scope of the entries
          in the State List entrenches upon any of the entries in the
          Central List the constitutionality of the law may be
          upheld by invoking the doctrine of pith and substance if
          on an analysis of the provisions of the Act it appears that
          by and large the law falls within the four corners of the
          State List and entrenchment, if any, is purely incidental
          or inconsequential.""


32.Article 254 of the Constitution succinctly deals with the law relating to

   inconsistency between the laws made by the Parliament and the State

   Legislature. The question of repugnancy under Article 254 will arise

   when a law made by Parliament and a law made by State Legislature

   occupies the same field with respect to one of the matters enumerated in

   Concurrent List and there is a direct conflict in two laws. In other

   words, the question of repugnancy arises only in connection with

   subjects enumerated in Concurrent List. In such situation the provisions

   enacted by Parliament and State Legislature cannot unitedly stand and



                                    29
   the State law will have to make the way for the Union Law. Once it is

   proved and established that the State law is repugnant to the Union law,

   the State law would become void but only to the extent of repugnancy.

   At the same time it is to be noted that mere possibility of repugnancy

   will not make a State law invalid, for repugnancy has to exist in fact and

   it must be shown clearly and sufficiently that State law is repugnant to

   Union law.


33.In the background of the aforesaid legal position we may now proceed to

   examine the question of competence of the State Legislature to enact a

   law of the nature of MCOCA.


34. A perusal of the relevant provisions of MCOCA would indicate that the

   said law authorizes the interception of wire, electronic and oral

   communication only if it is intended to prevent the commission of an

   organised crime or if it is intended to collect the evidence to the

   commission of such an organized crime. Interception of wire, electronic

   and oral communication with the said intent in case of urgency is also

   permitted under the State Act in which case it is to be approved by an




                                    30
  officer not below the rank of Additional Director General of Police

  within 48 hours of occurrence of interception.


35.The provisions of the MCOCA when read with the Statement of Objects

  and Reasons, which are already dealt with and referred to hereinbefore,

  would make it apparent and establish that the grounds for interception of

  the communication under MCOCA are distinct and different from the

  ground covered by Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act. A comparative

  reading of the provisions of the Telegraph Act as also of the MCOCA

  would establish that both the Acts deal with the subjects and areas which

  cannot be said to be identical and common.


36.In paragraph 48 of the impugned judgment, the High Court has

  reproduced a comparative chart, which was filed before the High court

  by the respondents herein, to show that MCOCA had made inroads on

  the legislative power of the Parliament. Our attention was also drawn to

  the said chart and we find that the conclusion of the High Court that

  there is repugnancy in view of the statutory provisions contained therein

  do not appear to be sound. The High Court has recorded that under the




                                   31
Central Law the communication can be intercepted only if there was

public emergency and interest of public safety was involved. The High

Court did not find any such provision in MCOCA because the grounds

for interception in the State law are totally different from the grounds

covered under the Telegraph Act. State law authorizes interception only

if it is intended to prevent the commission of an organized crime and/or

if it is intended to collect evidence of such organized crime. The High

Court thereafter proceeded to compare Rule 419A (1) and (5) of the

Telegraph Rules with Section 14(4), (8) and (10) of MCOCA. On the

basis of the aforesaid comparison it cannot be held that MCOCA had

encroached upon the legislative power of the Parliament. The proviso to

Rule 419A(1) deals with cases of emergency and provides that in cases

of emergency the communication may be intercepted without the prior

approval of the competent authority and the approval may be obtained

within a period of 15 days. It was held by the High Court that no time

limit is provided under Section 14(4) of the Act. But, the said finding

appears to be erroneous as Section 14(10) and (11) deal with emergency

situations and provide appropriate safeguards.


                                32
37.It is now well settled that though the Statement of Objects and Reasons

   accompanying a legislative Bill cannot be used to determine the true

   meaning and effect of the substantive provisions of a statute, but it is

   permissible to refer to the Statement of Objects and Reasons

   accompanying a Bill for the purpose of understanding the background,

   the antecedent state of affairs, the surrounding circumstances in relation

   to the statute, and the evil which the statute sought to remedy. In this

   regard we may refer to the majority view (6:1) in the case of Gujarat v.

   Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat, reported in (2005) 8 SCC 534,

   wherein it was observed as under:

      "Question 4. Statement of Objects and Reasons --
      Significance and role thereof
      69. Reference to the Statement of Objects and Reasons is
      permissible for understanding the background, antecedent state
      of affairs in relation to the statute, and the evil which the
      statute has sought to remedy. (See Principles of Statutory
      Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, 9th Edn., 2004, at p. 218).
      In State of W.B. v. Subodh Gopal Bose AIR 1954 SC 92 the
      Constitution Bench was testing the constitutional validity of
      the legislation impugned therein. The Statement of Objects and
      Reasons was used by S.R. Das, J. for ascertaining the
      conditions prevalent at that time which led to the introduction
      of the Bill and the extent and urgency of the evil which was
      sought to be remedied, in addition to testing the reasonableness
      of the restrictions imposed by the impugned provision. In his
      opinion, it was indeed very unfortunate that the Statement of
      Objects and Reasons was not placed before the High Court



                                    33
which would have assisted the High Court in arriving at the
right conclusion as to the reasonableness of the restriction
imposed. State of W.B. v. Union of India (1964) 1 SCR 371,
SCR at pp. 431-32 approved the use of Statement of Objects
and Reasons for the purpose of understanding the background
and the antecedent state of affairs leading up to the legislation.


70. In Quareshi-I 1959 SCR 629 itself, which has been very
strongly relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents
before us, Chief Justice S.R. Das has held: (SCR pp. 652 &amp;
661)
"The pronouncements of this Court further establish, amongst
other things, that there is always a presumption in favour of the
constitutionality of an enactment and that the burden is upon
him, who attacks it, to show that there has been a clear
violation of the constitutional principles. The courts, it is
accepted, must presume that the legislature understands and
correctly appreciates the needs of its own people, that its laws
are directed to problems made manifest by experience and that
its discriminations are based on adequate grounds. It must be
borne in mind that the legislature is free to recognise degrees of
harm and may confine its restrictions to those cases where the
need is deemed to be the clearest and finally that in order to
sustain the presumption of constitutionality the Court may take
into consideration matters of common knowledge, matters of
common report, the history of the times and may assume every
state of facts which can be conceived existing at the time of
legislation. (AIR para 15)
                                  * * *
... `The legislature is the best judge of what is good for the
community, by whose suffrage it comes into existence...'. This
should be the proper approach for the court but the ultimate
responsibility for determining the validity of the law must rest
with the court.... (AIR para 21, also see the several decisions
referred                        to                       therein.)"


71. The facts stated in the preamble and the Statement of
Objects and Reasons appended to any legislation are evidence



                               34
      of the legislative judgment. They indicate the thought process
      of the elected representatives of the people and their
      cognizance of the prevalent state of affairs, impelling them to
      enact the law. These, therefore, constitute important factors
      which amongst others will be taken into consideration by the
      court in judging the reasonableness of any restriction imposed
      on the fundamental rights of the individuals. The Court would
      begin with a presumption of reasonability of the restriction,
      more so when the facts stated in the Statement of Objects and
      Reasons and the preamble are taken to be correct and they
      justify the enactment of law for the purpose sought to be
      achieved."


38.The objects and reasons read with the contents of the Act would indicate

   that the subject matter of the Act is maintaining public order and

   prevention by police of commission of serious offences affecting public

   order and, therefore as submitted, it will be relatable to Entry 1 and 2 of

   List II.   After enacting MCOCA, assent of the President was also

   obtained and received on 24.04.1999. That being the position if the

   subject matter and the field of legislation are found to be covered under

   any of the entries of the Concurrent List also, the constitutional validity

   will have to be upheld. Thus, Entry 1, 2 and 12 of the Concurrent List

   would and could also be brought into operation and aid can be taken

   from said entries also, for the Act deals with subject matters which are

   relatable as well to Entries 1, 2 and 12 of the Concurrent List.




                                     35
39.We are of the considered opinion that source of power to legislate the

   aforesaid Act can be derived by the State from the aforesaid entries of

   the State List and the Concurrent List and while enacting the aforesaid

   State Act the assent of the President was also taken. Therefore, the Act

   cannot be said to be beyond the legislative competence of the State

   Legislature. The content of the said Act might have encroached upon the

   scope of Entry 31 of List I but the same is only an incidental

   encroachment. As the main purpose of the Act is within the parameter of

   Entry 1 and 2 of the State Legislature we find no reason to hold that the

   provisions of Sections 13 to 16 are constitutionally invalid because of

   legislative competence.


40.Another ground on which challenge was made was that Section 13 to 16

   violates the mandate of Article 21 of the constitution. It was submitted

   that provisions contained under Section 13 to 16 of the impugned act

   authorizing interception of communication violates the Right to Privacy,

   which is part of right to `life' and `personal liberty' enriched under

   Article 21. Article 21 of the Constitution reads as under:


    "Protection to Life and Personal Liberty



                                    36
     21. No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
     except according to procedure established by law."



41.The Right to Privacy has been developed by the Supreme Court over a

  period of time and with the expansive interpretation of the phrase

  `personal liberty', this right has been read into Article 21. It was stated

  in the case of Gobind v. State of M.P. reported in (1975) 2 SCC 148

  that Right to Privacy is a `right to be let alone' and a citizen has a right

  `to safeguard the privacy of his own, his family, marriage, procreation,

  motherhood, child-bearing and education among other matters'. The

  term privacy has not been defined and it was held in the case of People's

  Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) v. Union of India, reported in (1997)

  1 SCC 301 that as a concept it may be too broad and moralistic to define

  it judicially and whether right to privacy can be claimed or has been

  infringed in a given case would depend on the facts of the said case.



42.The question whether interception of telephonic message/tapping of

  telephonic conversation constitutes a serious invasion of an individual

  right to privacy was considered by this court on two occasions. One in




                                    37
   the year 1972 in the case of R.M. Malkani v. State of Maharashtra,

   reported in (1973) 1 SCC 471, wherein it was held as under:

      "31.........Article 21 contemplates procedure established by
      law with regard to deprivation of life or personal liberty. The
      telephonic conversation of an innocent citizen will be protected
      by Courts against wrongful or highhanded interference by
      tapping the conversation. The protection is not for the guilty
      citizen against the efforts of the police to vindicate the law and
      prevent corruption of public servants. It must not be understood
      that the Courts will tolerate safeguards for the protection of the
      citizen to be imperilled by permitting the police to proceed by
      unlawful or irregular methods. In the present case there is no
      unlawful or even irregular method in obtaining the tape-
      recording of the conversation."


43.The question posed above was considered again in detail by this Court in

   the case of People's Union (supra), wherein it was held as under:

      "17. We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that right to
      privacy is a part of the right to "life" and "personal liberty"
      enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution. Once the facts
      in a given case constitute a right to privacy, Article 21 is
      attracted. The said right cannot be curtailed "except according
      to procedure established by law".

      18. The right to privacy -- by itself -- has not been identified
      under the Constitution. As a concept it may be too broad and
      moralistic to define it judicially. Whether right to privacy can
      be claimed or has been infringed in a given case would depend
      on the facts of the said case. But the right to hold a telephone
      conversation in the privacy of one's home or office without
      interference can certainly be claimed as "right to privacy".



                                    38
      Conversations on the telephone are often of an intimate and
      confidential character. Telephone conversation is a part of
      modern man's life. It is considered so important that more and
      more people are carrying mobile telephone instruments in their
      pockets. Telephone conversation is an important facet of a
      man's private life. Right to privacy would certainly include
      telephone conversation in the privacy of one's home or office.
      Telephone-tapping would, thus, infract Article 21 of the
      Constitution of India unless it is permitted under the procedure
      established by law."


44.The interception of conversation though constitutes an invasion of an

   individual right to privacy but the said right can be curtailed in

   accordance to procedure validly established by law. Thus what the Court

   is required to see is that the procedure itself must be fair, just and

   reasonable and non arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive.



45.The object of the MCOCA is to prevent the organised crime and a

   perusal of the provisions of Act under challenge would indicate that the

   said law authorizes the interception of wire, electronic or oral

   communication only if it is intended to prevent the commission of an

   organised crime or if it is intended to collect the evidence to the

   commission of such an organized crime. The procedures authorizing

   such interception are also provided therein with enough procedural safe



                                    39
   guards, some of which are indicated and discussed hereinbefore. In

   addition under Section 16 of the MCOCA, provision for prohibiting and

   punishing the unauthorized user of information acquired by interception

   of wire, electronic or oral communication has been made. Thus as the

   Act under challenge contains sufficient safeguards and also satisfies the

   aforementioned mandate the contention of the respondents that

   provisions of Section 13 to 16 are violative of the Article 21 of the

   Constitution cannot also be accepted.


46.Having recorded our finding in the aforesaid manner, we now proceed to

   decide the issue as to whether a person accused of an offence under

   MCOCA should be denied bail if on the date of the offence he is on bail

   for an offence under MCOCA or any other Act. Section 21 (5) of

   MCOCA reads as under:

      "Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the accused
      shall not be granted bail if it is noticed by the Court that he was
      on bail in an offence under this Act, or under any other Act, on
      the date of the offence in question"


47.As discussed above the object of the MCOCA is to prevent the organised

   crime and, therefore, there could be reason to deny consideration of grant



                                     40
  of bail if one has committed a similar offence once again after being

  released on bail but the same consideration cannot be extended to a

  person who commits an offence under some other Act, for commission

  of an offence under some other act would not be in any case in

  consonance with the object of the act which is enacted in order to

  prevent only organised crime.


48.We consider that a person who is on bail after being arrested for

  violation of law unconnected with MCOCA, should not be denied his

  right to seek bail if he is arrested under the MCOCA, for it cannot be

  said that he is a habitual offender. The provision of denying his right to

  seek bail, if he was arrested earlier and was on bail for commission of an

  offence under any other Act, suffers from the vice of unreasonable

  classification by placing in the same class, offences which may have

  nothing in common with those under MCOCA, for the purpose of

  denying consideration of bail. The aforesaid expression and restriction

  on the right of seeking bail is not even in consonance with the object

  sought to be achieved by the Act and, therefore, on the face of the

  provisions this is an excessive restriction.


                                    41
49.The High Court found that the expression "or under any other Act"

   appearing in the section is arbitrary and discriminatory and accordingly

   struck down the said words from sub-Section (5) of Section 21 as being

   violative of Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution. We uphold the order

   of the High Court to the extent that the words "or under any other Act"

   should be struck down from Sub section (5) of Section 21.



50.In view of the aforesaid discussions, we allow the appeals of the State

   Government, insofar as the constitutional validity of Sections 13 to 16 of

   MCOCA is concerned. We uphold the validity of the said provisions.

   The decision of the High Court striking down the words "or under any

   other Act" from sub-Section (5) of Section 21 of the Act is however

   upheld. The parties to bear their own cost.


51.Consequential orders, if any, in terms of the observations and directions

   passed in these appeals, may be passed by the concerned Court(s) where

   any proceeding under MCOCA is pending.


                                    42
                         ...........................CJI
                         (K.G. Balakrishnan)


                         ................................J.
                         (R.V. Raveendran)


                         ................................J.
                         (Dr. Mukundakam Sharma)
New Delhi,
September 1, 2008




                    43

