
Supreme Court of India
Chandrakant Baddi vs Addl. Dist. Magistrate &amp; Police ... on 29 April, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Harjit Singh Bedi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  756 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Chandrakant Baddi

RESPONDENT:
Addl. Dist. Magistrate &amp; Police Commnr. &amp; Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 29/04/2008

BENCH:
TARUN CHATTERJEE &amp; HARJIT SINGH BEDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

REPORTABLE

 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.756 of 2008
(arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 2280 of 2007)
WITH 
CRL. A. NO.757 of  2008 
@ SLP(Crl).) No.2282/2007

1.	Leave granted.
2.	The appellant herein was detained for a period of one 
year under an order dated 9th December 2005 passed 
under Section 3 (2) of the Karnataka Prevention of 
Dangerous Activities of Bottleggers Drug Offenders, 
Gamblers, Goondas, Immoral Traffic Offenders and 
Slum Grabbers Act 1985.  This order was challenged in 
the Karnataka High Court on 16th December 2005 by 
way of a writ of habeas corpus.  By its order dated 1st 
September 2006, the Division Bench relying on 
Commissioner of Police &amp; Anr. vs. Gurbux Anandram 
Bhiryani   (1988) Supp. SCC 568 quashed the order of 
detention and directed that the appellant be set at 
liberty.  The State of Karnataka thereafter moved an 
application for review of the order dated 1st September 
2006 on the plea that the aforesaid judgment had been 
over-ruled by a later judgment of this Court in T.Devki 
vs. Govt of Tamil Nadu &amp; Ors. (1990) 2 SCC 456.  The 
Hon'ble Judges constituting the Bench observed that 
they had "spent sleepless" nights on account of an error 
committed by them in the light that the counsel had not 
brought the subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court 
to notice and that their judicial conscience had been 
pricked for having passed an order relying on a 
judgment which had been over-ruled.  The Bench thus 
allowed the Review Petition on 30th March 2007 and re-
called the order dated 1st September 2006.  The Bench 
also noticed that the period of detention had since 
expired on 8th December 2006 and accordingly 
observed:

"In these circumstances, despite the 
opposition of Sri Javali, learned counsel 
and despite his contention that his client 
cannot be sent back to jail, in the light of 
a detention order having come to an end 
in the case on hand, we are not prepared 
to accept his submissions. A beneficiary 
of a defective order cannot be permitted 
to have the benefit and that benefit has to 
be recalled in the light of recalling benefit 
order.  In these circumstances, we deem 
it proper to direct the police to take him 
to custody for the remaining period."

 3.     It is against this order that the present appeals have 
been filed.  While issuing notice on 30th April 2007 the 
operation of the impugned order had been stayed.  In the 
meanwhile, the learned counsel for the respondents has also 
filed a reply and we have accordingly heard the matter on 
merits.  The learned counsel for the appellant has pointed 
out that as the detention order was deemed to have come to 
an end on the expiry of one year i.e. 8th December 2006, it 
would be inappropriate to send the appellant back into 
custody and for this plea has placed reliance on Sunil 
Fulchand Shah vs. Union of India &amp; Ors. (2000) 3 SCC 
409.  The learned counsel for the respondent has, however, 
placed reliance on a subsequent judgment of this Court in 
State of T.N. &amp; Anr. Vs. Alagar (2006) 7 SCC 540 to 
contend that the period during which the detenu appellant 
had remained outside custody on account of a wrong order 
could not be taken into account in computing the period of 
detention and that it was still open to the detaining authority 
to examine as to what was to be done in the circumstances of 
the case keeping in view certain specified factors.		
4.      We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and 
gone through the record.  In Sunil Fulchand Shah (supra) the 
Bench was dealing with the question posed as under:
	"First, whether the period of 
detention is a fixed period running from the 
dates specified in the detention order and 
ending with the expiry of that period or the 
period is automatically extended by any period 
of parole granted to the detenu. Secondly, in a 
case where the High Court allows a habeas 
corpus petition and directs a detenu to be 
released and in consequence the detenu is set 
free and thereafter on appeal the erroneous 
decision of the High Court is reversed, is it 
open to this Court to direct the arrest and 
detention of the detenu, to undergo detention 
for the period which fell short of the original 
period of detention intended in the detention 
order on account of the erroneous High Court 
order."

This question was answered in the following terms:
	"The quashing of an order of detention by the High 
Court brings to an end such an order and if an 
appeal is allowed against the order of the High 
Court, the question whether or not the detenu 
should be made to surrender to undergo the 
remaining period of detention, would depend upon a 
variety of factors and in particular on the question 
of lapse of time between the date of detention, the 
order of the High Court, and the order of this Court, 
setting aside the order of the High Court.

       	A detenu need not be sent back to undergo the 
remaining period of detention, after a long lapse of 
time, when even the maximum prescribed period 
intended in the order of detention has expired, 
unless there still exists a proximate temporal nexus 
between the period of detention indicated in the 
order by which the detenu was required to be 
detained pursuant to the appellate order and the 
State is able to satisfy the court about the 
desirability of "further" or "continued" detention."

5.	This judgment was followed in Alagar's case and in 
paragraph 9 it was observed that:
"The residual question is whether it 
would be appropriate to direct the 
respondent to surrender for serving 
remaining period of detention in view of  
passage of time.  As was noticed in Sunil 
Fulchand Shah vs. Union of India and State 
of T.N. v. Kethiyan Perumal it is for the 
appropriate State to consider whether the 
impact of the acts, which led to the order of 
detention still survives and whether it would 
be desirable to send back the detenu for 
serving remainder period of detention. 
Necessary order in this regard shall be 
passed within two months by the appellant 
State. Passage of time in all cases cannot be 
a ground not to send the detenu to serve 
remainder of the period of detention. It all 
depends on the facts of the act and the 
continuance or otherwise of the effect of the 
objectionable acts. The State shall consider 
whether there still exists a proximate 
temporal nexus between the period of 
detention indicated in the order by which 
the detenu was required to be detained and 
the date when the detenu is required to be 
detained pursuant to the present order."

6.	A reading of the above quoted paragraphs would reveal 
that when an order of a Court quashing the detention is set 
aside, the remittance of the detenu to jail to serve out the 
balance period of detention does not automatically follow and 
it is open to the detaining authority to go into the various 
factors delineated in the judgments aforequoted so as to find 
out as to whether it would be appropriate to send the detenu 
back to serve out the balance period of detention.  In this 
view of the matter, we are of the opinion that the detaining 
authority must be permitted to re-examine the matter and to 
take a decision thereon within a period of 3 months from the 
date of the supply of the copy of this order.  We further direct 
that during this period the interim order in favour of the 
appellant given by us on 30th April 2007 will continue to 
operate.
7.	The appeals are allowed in the above terms.

