
Supreme Court of India
Pradeep Kumar Jain vs Buttan And Ors on 11 February, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, V.S. Sirpurkar
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1227 of 2008

PETITIONER:
PRADEEP KUMAR JAIN

RESPONDENT:
BUTTAN AND ORS

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 11/02/2008

BENCH:
S.B. SINHA &amp; V.S. SIRPURKAR

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CIVIL  APPEAL  NO. 1227  OF 2008
[Arising out of SLP(C) No.22369/2005]

	Delay condoned.

	Leave granted.

	The claimants-respondents were travelling as unauthorized passengers in a 
Matador vehicle which was being rashly and negligently driven by one Chetan 
Kumar. 

	The contention raised by the Insurance Company is that the said Chetan Kumar did 
not have any valid licence while driving the said vehicle.  One of the questions which 
was raised before the learned Motor Accident Claims Tribunal was as to whether the 
deceased and in the injured persons were travelling as passengers or as employees of 
the owner of the vehicle.  
	It is not in dispute that the insurance policy prescribed that the vehicle may be used 
only for carrying goods within the meaning of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The 
policy did not cover carriage of the passengers in the vehicle except the employees, 
other than the driver, not exceeding six in number coming within the purview of the 
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923. 

	The Tribunal arrived at a finding that all the persons, who were 14 in number, were 
travelling in the said vehicle as passengers and not as labourers/employees of the 
owner of the vehicle.  Despite the same, the Tribunal opined that as the Insurance 
Company has not been able to discharge the onus of proof that the owner of the 
vehicle has committed breach of the conditions of the contract of insurance, the claim 
petition should be allowed. 

	Aggrieved thereby the appellant herein preferred an appeal in terms of Section 173 
of the Motor Vehicle Act which has been disposed of directing:
	"Thus, we hold that all the respondents are jointly and severally 
liable to pay the amount to the appellant and in the event the 
amount is paid by the  respondent No.3 shall be entitled to recover it 
from the insured in the same proceedings without initiating any 
fresh proceeding against the respondent No.2.
	In the light of the above mentioned decision, which is fully 
applicable in this case, this appeal is allowed and it is directed that 
the respondent No.8/National Insurance Co. Ltd. shall make 
payment to the third party and in the event the amount is paid by 
the respondent No.8/National Insurance Co. Ltd., it shall be entitled 
to recover it from the appellant-owner Pradeep Kumar Jain 
(insured) in the same proceedings without initiating any fresh 
proceedings against the appellant." 

	Learned counsel for the appellant would draw our attention to the finding arrived 
at by the High Court to contend that there was nothing to suggest that, merely in the 
absence of production of licence or that the vehicle was driven by the driver without 
lincence, on the basis thereof the impugned direction could not have been issued.

	We, however, need not go into the aforementioned question as evidently in terms of 
a decision of this Court in New India Assurance Co. Ltd. vs. Asha Rani &amp; Ors., [2003 
(2) SCC 223], which has been followed by this Court in a large number of decisions, it 
has been categorically held that a transport vehicle cannot be used for the purpose of 
carrying passengers. We are, therefore, of the opinion that there is no merit in this 
appeal which is dismissed accordingly.  

	Learned counsel for  the appellant states that the awarded amount shall be 
deposited, within a period of eight weeks, before the Tribunal wherein proceeding for 
recovery of the awarded amount has been initiated.  

