
Supreme Court of India
Shaikh Majid And Anr vs State Of Maharashtra And Ors on 21 January, 2008Author: D A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, Aftab Alam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  132 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Shaikh Majid  and Anr

RESPONDENT:
State of Maharashtra and Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 21/01/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; AFTAB ALAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.   132 OF 2008
(Arising out of S.L.P.(Crl.) No.2809 of 2007)


DR. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J.

1.	Leave granted.

2.	Challenge in this appeal is to the judgment of the 
Division Bench of the Bombay High Court at Aurangabad, 
dismissing the appeal filed by the appellants.  By a common 
judgment two appeals were disposed of.  Both the appeals 
were directed against the judgment and order passed by 
learned Third Additional Sessions Judge, Aurangabad, in 
Sessions Case No. 39 of 1990. Originally there were 37 
accused persons in the Sessions Case who faced trial for 
offences punishable under Sections 302, 307, 395, 436, 324, 
323, 147, 148 and 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in 
short the 'IPC'), Section 25 of the Indian Telegraph Act,   (in 
short the 'Telegraph Act') and Section 3 of Prevention of 
Damage to Public Properties Act, 1984 (in short the 'Public 
Property Act') and Sections 3 and 4 of the Religious 
Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988 (in short the 
'Religious Institutions Act').  Learned Trial judge convicted the 
present appellants who were accused Nos.1 and 26 
respectively for the offences punishable under Section 302 
read with Section 34 and Section 324 read with Section 34 
IPC.  Imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.1,000/- with default 
stipulations and three years imprisonment and fine of 
Rs.1,000/- with default stipulation were imposed.  Appellant 
No. 2-Shaikh Abbas was also convicted for offences 
punishable under Section 452 read with Section 149 IPC and 
was sentenced to five years' rigorous imprisonment and fine of 
Rs.1000/- with default stipulation.  He was also convicted for 
offences punishable under Section 435 read with Section 149 
IPC, and for offences punishable under Section 323 read with 
Section 149 IPC. The sentences were directed to run 
concurrently and it was further directed that in case the fine 
amount was realized, part of it, i.e. Rs.10,000/-, was to be 
paid to the widow of Jaynarayan (hereinafter referred to as the 
'deceased').  Three prosecution witnesses were also directed to 
be paid compensation of Rs.1,000/-.  Law was set into motion 
on the basis of the statement given by the one Krishna (PW4), 
Sandu, Police Inspector (PW-11), recorded the statement 
which was treated as the First Information Report (in short the 
'FIR').  The information given by him was to the following 
effect:

"Krishna PW4 has alleged in the first 
information report Exhibit 63 that the 
occurrence in the question took place on 
10.10.1989.  On that day at about 4 P.M., he 
along with about 200 villagers had been to a 
temple for darshana and also for performing 
pooja on the even of Deshara festival.  All of 
them went to temple and Shami tree near the 
cremation ground on the outskirts of village 
Balanagar, Tq. Paithan. As usual, the villagers 
had been to the place of pooja in a procession 
with drums etc. After pooja they entered the 
gate of village (Ves) and had been to the Ram 
and Maroti temples for offering their prayers. 
At this time, about 250-300 people from 
mosque, adjacent to Ram temple, had started 
pelting stones at them. While pelting stones 
they were exhorting that it was a time for 
offering prayer (Namaz) and therefore, these 
people should leave the place immediately.  
Krishna PW4, deceased Jaynarayan,  
Pandharinath, Babasaheb and other villagers 
have noted the presence of about 3-32 accused 
persons. According to them, these 32 accused 
persons along with 200-250 persons assaulted 
them with sticks, stones, knives etc. the 
assault was on the people belonging to Hindu 
religion.  PW 4 Krishna had been assaulted by 
accused No. l Shaikh Majid and accused No.26 
Shaikh Abbas with knives. Such assault was 
on his right hand and below shoulder, on right 
shoulder as well as in the stomach.  He 
suffered wounds.  Such stabbing is suffered by 
Ranganath, Laxman, Harichand, Gorakh, 
Hanuman, Uttarm, Bhausaheb, Badri Narayan 
and Dr. Gopi Kisan as well as Laxman 
Shamrao.  Other persons also sustained 
serious injuries.

3.	As noted above, on the basis of information given by 
Krishna, (PW-4) case was registered under Sections 307,147, 
148, 149 and 323 IPC.  Investigation was undertaken and on 
completion thereof charge sheet was filed.  At this juncture, it 
is to be noted that another FIR was lodged at about 6 p.m. by 
appellant accused No.1 against Krishna (PW4) and others. 
Charge sheet thereafter was filed. Undisputedly, there was 
order of acquittal in the said case.  The trial Court placing 
reliance on the evidence adduced, held present appellants 
guilty of offence committed punishable under Section 302 read 
with Section 34 IPC.  They were also found guilty of having 
committed offence punishable under Section 324 in relation to 
the injury caused to Krishna PW4.  As noted above, appellant-
Shaikh Majid was also convicted under various other 
provisions.  The stand of the appellants before the High Court 
was that the evidence of the so called eye witnesses PWs. 4, 5, 
6 &amp; 7 was not consistent.  Only one blow was given and that 
in course of a sudden quarrel, injuries were sustained by the 
accused persons.  The prosecution has, therefore, suppressed 
the truth.  The plea was not accepted and as noted above their 
appeal was dismissed. 

4.	The stand taken by the appellant before the High Court 
was reiterated.  

5.	Learned counsel for the State supported the judgment of 
the trial Court as affirmed by the High Court.
 6.	One of the pleas is that the prosecution has not 
explained the injuries on the accused. The issue is, if there is 
no such explanation what would be its effect? We are not 
prepared to agree with the learned counsel for the defence that 
in each and every case where the prosecution fails to explain 
the injuries found on some of the accused, the prosecution 
case should automatically be rejected, without any further 
probe. In Mohar Rai v. State of Bihar (AIR  1968 SC 1281)   it 
was observed: (AIR p.1284, para 6) 
"In our judgment the failure of the prosecution 
to offer any explanation in that regard shows 
that evidence of the prosecution witnesses 
relating to the incident is not true or at any 
rate not wholly true. Further those injuries 
probabilise the plea taken by the appellants." 

7.	In another important case Lakshmi Singh v. State of Bihar 
(1976 (4) SCC 394) after referring to the ratio laid down in 
Mohar Rai case  (supra)  this Court observed: (SCC p.401, para 
12): 
"Where the prosecution fails to explain the 
injuries on the accused, two results follow: (1) 
that the evidence of the prosecution witnesses 
is untrue; and (2) that the injuries probabilise 
the plea taken by the appellants." 

8.	It was further observed that: (SCC p.  401, para 12) 
"In a murder case, the non-explanation of the 
injuries sustained by the accused at about the 
time of the occurrence or in the course of 
altercation is a very important circumstance 
from which the court can draw the following 
inferences: 
(1)	that the prosecution has suppressed the 
genesis and the origin of the occurrence 
and has thus not presented the true 
version;
 (2) that the witnesses who have denied the 
presence of the injuries on the person of the 
accused are lying on a most material point and 
therefore their evidence is unreliable;
 (3) that in case there is a defence version 
which explains the injuries on the person of 
the accused it is rendered probable so as to 
throw doubt on the prosecution case. 
The omission on the part of the prosecution to 
explain the injuries on the person of the 
accused assumes much greater importance 
where the evidence consists of interested or 
inimical witnesses or where the defence gives a 
version which competes in probability with 
that of the prosecution one." 
 9.	In Mohar Rai case it is made clear that failure of the 
prosecution to offer any explanation regarding the injuries 
found on the accused may show that the evidence related to 
the incident is not true or at any rate, not wholly true. 
Likewise in Lakshmi Singh case, it is observed that any non-
explanation of the injuries on the accused by the prosecution 
may affect the prosecution case. But such a non-explanation 
may assume greater importance where the defence gives a 
version which competes in probability with that of the 
prosecution. But where the evidence is clear, cogent and 
creditworthy and where the court can distinguish the truth 
from falsehood, the mere fact that the injuries are not 
explained by the prosecution cannot by itself be a sole basis to 
reject such evidence, and consequently, the whole case. Much 
depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. These 
aspects were highlighted by this Court in Vijayee Singh v. 
State of U.P. (1990 (3) SCC 190). 
10.	Non-prosecution of injuries by the prosecution will not 
affect the prosecution case where injuries sustained by the 
accused are minor and superficial or where the evidence is so 
clear and cogent, so independent and disinterested, so 
probable, consistent and creditworthy, that it outweighs the 
effect of the omission on the part of the prosecution to explain 
the injuries. As observed by this Court in Ramlagan Singh v. 
State of Bihar (1973 (3) SCC 881) the prosecution is not called 
upon in all cases to explain the injuries received by the 
accused persons. It is for the defence to put questions to the 
prosecution witnesses regarding the injuries on the accused 
persons. When that is not done, there is no occasion for the 
prosecution witnesses to explain any injury on the person of 
an accused. In Hare Krishna Singh v. State of Bihar (1988 (2) 
SCC 98), it was observed that the obligation of the prosecution 
to explain the injuries sustained by the accused in the same 
occurrence may not arise in each and every case. In other 
words, it is not an invariable rule that the prosecution has to 
explain the injuries sustained by the accused in the same 
occurrence. If the witnesses examined on behalf of the 
prosecution are believed by the court in proof of guilt of the 
accused beyond reasonable doubt, question of obligation of the 
prosecution to explain injuries sustained by the accused will 
not arise. When the prosecution comes with a definite case 
that the offence has been committed by the accused and 
proves its case beyond any reasonable doubt, it becomes 
hardly necessary for the prosecution to again explain how and 
under what circumstances injuries have been inflicted on the 
person of the accused. It is more so when the injuries are 
simple or superficial in nature. 
11.	The residual question is the applicability of Section 302 
IPC. As noted above it was submitted that only one blow was 
given and that too in the course of a sudden quarrel.

12.	In essence, the stand of learned counsel for the appellant 
is that Exception IV to Section 300 IPC would apply to the 
facts of the case.     

13.	For bringing in operation of Exception 4 to Section 300 
IPC, it has to be established that the act was committed 
without premeditation, in a sudden fight in the heat of passion 
upon a sudden quarrel without the offender having taken 
undue advantage and not having acted in a cruel or unusual 
manner.

14.	The Fourth Exception to Section 300 IPC covers acts 
done in a sudden fight. The said Exception deals with a case of 
prosecution not covered by the First Exception, after which its 
place would have been more appropriate. The Exception is 
founded upon the same principle, for in both there is absence 
of premeditation. But, while in the case of Exception 1 there is 
total deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception 4, there is 
only that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and 
urges them to deeds which they would not otherwise do. There 
is provocation in Exception 4 as in Exception 1; but the injury 
done is not the direct consequence of that provocation. In fact 
Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding that a 
blow may have been struck, or some provocation given in the 
origin of the dispute or in whatever way the quarrel may have 
originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties puts 
them in respect of guilt upon equal footing. A "sudden fight" 
implies mutual provocation and blows on each side. The 
homicide committed is then clearly not traceable to unilateral 
provocation, nor in such cases could the whole blame be 
placed on one side. For if it were so, the Exception more 
appropriately applicable would be Exception 1. There is no 
previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight 
suddenly takes place, for which both parties are more or less 
to be blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if the 
other had not aggravated it by his own conduct it would not 
have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual 
provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to apportion the 
share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The help of 
Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused ( a ) without 
premeditation; ( b ) in a sudden fight; ( c ) without the offender 
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual 
manner; and ( d ) the fight must have been with the person 
killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients 
mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the "fight" 
occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is not defined in 
IPC. It takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that 
there must be no time for the passions to cool down and in 
this case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury on 
account of the verbal altercation in the beginning. A fight is a 
combat between two or mo re persons whether with or without 
weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule as to 
what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a question 
of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must 
necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each case. For the 
application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that 
there was a sudden quarrel and that there was no 
premeditation. It must further be shown that the offender has 
not taken undue advantage or acted in cruel or unusual 
manner. The expression "undue advantage" as used in the 
provision means "unfair advantage". 
15.	The above position is highlighted in Sandhya Jadhav v. 
State of Maharashtra (2006) 4 SCC 653).  
16.	It cannot be said that whenever a single blow is given, 
that would not attract Section 302 IPC.  

17.	In the instant case considering the background facts and 
the nature of the weapon used i.e. small knife the appropriate 
conviction would be under Section 304 Part I IPC and not 
Section 302 IPC.  Accordingly the conviction is altered, 
custodial sentence of ten years would suffice.

18.	The appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent.

