
Supreme Court of India
State Of U. P. &amp; Ors vs Wasim Ahmed on 15 January, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Dalveer Bhandari
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  424 of 2008

PETITIONER:
STATE OF U. P. &amp; ORS.

RESPONDENT:
WASIM AHMED

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 15/01/2008

BENCH:
TARUN CHATTERJEE &amp; DALVEER BHANDARI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

O R D E R
(Arising out of S.L.P. (C)No. 11394 of 2006
1.	Leave granted.  
2.	This appeal is directed against a final order dated                 
8th of December, 2005 passed by a Division Bench of the 
High Court at Allahabad in First Appeal No. 306 of 2002, 
by which the Division Bench of the High Court had 
declined to interfere with the findings of the trial Court and 
dismissed the appeal.  
3.	We have heard the learned counsel for the parties 
and after going through the impugned order, we are of the 
view that the impugned order cannot be sustained as it 
appears to us that the Division Bench, while deciding the 
appeal, has not at all applied its mind nor has considered 
the points raised by the parties before it.  The Division 
Bench, while dismissing the appeal, had made the 
following order :-   
Sri Alok Kumar Singh submitted that although 
nine issues were framed but the same were 
decided in 33 lines only, therefore, the 
judgment is bad.  However, we have perused 
the judgment and found that there is nothing 
bad in the judgment
.
     In view of above, the appeal lacks merit 
and is, therefore, dismissed.

4.	A perusal of this order would show that the Division 
Bench, without going into the merits of the appeal and 
without applying its mind, had dismissed the appeal only 
by saying that on perusal, it was found that there was 
nothing bad in the judgment.  In our view, since the 
appeal was a first appeal i.e. the appeal had to be 
decided not only on law but also on facts, it was the duty 
of the Division Bench to apply its mind and decide the 
same in accordance with law after passing a speaking 
and reasoned order.
5.	For the reasons aforesaid, we are unable to sustain 
the order of the Division Bench and accordingly, set aside 
the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court and 
send it back to the High Court for a fresh decision in 
accordance with law after giving hearing to the parties.  It 
is expected that the High Court shall decide the appeal 
within two months from the date of communication of this 
order to the High Court.  No unnecessary adjournments 
shall be granted to either of the parties.  
6.	The appeal is thus allowed to the extent indicated 
above with no order as to costs.      

