
Supreme Court of India
Lata vs Chief Executive Officer &amp; Ors on 29 August, 2008Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                                                           1



                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                             CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                              CIVIIL APPEAL NO. 5323 OF 2008
        (Arising out of SLP(C)No.18954 OF 2005)


LATA                                                               ...   APPELLANT(S)

                                           :VERSUS:

CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER AND ORS.                                   ...   RESPONDENT(S)




                                           ORDER

                  Despite service of notice, nobody appears for the respondent Nos. 3 &amp;

       4.



                  Leave granted.

                  This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 11.4.2005

       passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, Nagpur Bench, Nagpur, in

       Writ Petition No. 3305/2005 whereby and whereunder the writ petition filed by

       respondent No.4 herein was allowed in part.

                  The State of Maharashtra issued an advertisement for appointment to

       three posts of Anganwadi Sevika, Rohinkhed in the year 2003. An interview was

       held on 20.7.2003. The appellant admittedly obtained the highest marks amongst

       the candidates of Village Rohinkhed. However, as no order for sanction of the said

       post was issued she was not appointed.
                                               2
            In the year 2004, another advertisement was issued for one post of

Agganwadi Sevika. Both the appellant and the private respondents applied for

appointment in the said post. In the interview held pursuant to the second

advertisement, respondent No.4 obtained more marks than the appellant.



            It appears that two offers of appointment were issued on 30.6.2004; one

in terms of sanction letter dated 30.6.2004 appointing respondent No.3 herein as an

Anganwadi Sevika at Rohinkhed and another in terms of sanction letter dated

28.6.2004 appointing the appellant herein as Anganwadi Sevika in the Additional

Anganwadi Centre, Rohinkhed.



    On the said basis and keeping in view the performance of the appellant in the

selection process held in the year 2003, another offer of appointment was issued in

favour of the appellant on 30.6.2004 itself.


            The respondent No.4 filed a writ petition before the High Court

questioning the said order of appointment. By reason of the impugned judgment,

the High Court allowed the writ petition in part directing:



            "In the result, writ petition deserves to be partly allowed. We
            allow writ petition partly and quash and set aside the
            appointment of respondent No.4 made to the post of Anganwadi
            Sevika and we direct the respondent No.1 and 2 to fill in the post
            of Anganwadi Sevika which has become vacant by issuing fresh
            advertisement and after conidering the claims of all eligible
                                           3

            candidates."
            The High Court in arriving at the said decision opined that respondent

No.4 (writ petitioner in the High Court) had secured higher marks than the

appellant. Learned counsel for the appellant would submit that the High Court

committed a serious error in passing the impugned judgment in so far as it failed to

take into consideration that as the appointment of respondent No.3 as Anganwadi

Sevika, Rohinkhed was made in the regular post, the appointment of the appellant

herein was made for the additional Anganwadi Centre, Rohinkhed.



            Our attention was also drawn to the fact that the offer of appointment

was issued in favour of respondent No.3 in terms of the sanction letter dated

30.6.2004, whereas the appellant has been appointed in terms of sanction letter

dated 28.6.2004.


            If the order of sanction dated 28.6.2004 was passed on the basis of the

interview held pursuant to the advertisement issued in the year 2003, wherein the

appellant obtained the highest marks amongst the candidates of Village Rohinkhed,

we are of the opinion that respondent No.1 cannot be said to have committed any

error in issuing the offer of appointment in favour of the appellant in respect of the

additional Anganwadi Centre, Rohinkhed.


            The impugned judgment, therefore, cannot be sustained and it is set

aside. The appellant's services has since been terminated. She may be reinstated in
                                           4

service. The appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.




                                                 ......................J
                                                 (S.B. SINHA)



                                                  .......................J
                                                 (CYRIAC JOSEPH)

NEW DELHI,
AUGUST 29, 2008.

