
Supreme Court of India
Chhagan Lal [D] By Lrs And Ors vs Kamal Chand [D] By Lrs And Ors on 26 February, 2008Bench: Tarun Chatterjee, Harjit Singh Bedi
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  1638 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Chhagan Lal [D] by LRs and Ors

RESPONDENT:
Kamal Chand [D] by LRs and Ors

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 26/02/2008

BENCH:
TARUN CHATTERJEE &amp; HARJIT SINGH BEDI

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT
O R D E R

CIVIL APPEAL NO 1638 OF 2008
[ Arising out of SLP [C] No.20263 of 2006 ]

1.	Leave granted.
2.	This appeal is preferred against the final judgment and order 
dated 31st of August, 2006 passed by the High Court of Judicature at 
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, in Civil Revision No.1479, dismissing the 
civil revision with costs quantified at Rs.3,000/-. At the time of 
issuance of notice                            on 14th of December, 2006, this 
Court passed the following order:
"	Counsel for the petitioners, who are the legal 
representatives of the purchaser from the plaintiff in the 
suit and who have been found guilty of the breach of the 
order of injunction states that the petitioners shall 
restore possession to the Receive of the portion which 
was injuncted from being occupied and which was 
vacated by Punjab National Bank.  
	Issue notice.  In the meantime, the attached 
property belonging to the petitioners shall not be sold."

3.	We have heard learned counsel for the parties.  Mr. Anip 
Sachthey, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants before 
us, submitted, on instructions, that since there is no Receiver of the 
portion of the suit property in respect of which injunction was granted, 
possession could not be restored to the said Receiver.  Since, notice by 
this Court was issued on the simple understanding that the appellants 
shall restore possession to the Receiver of the portion which was 
injuncted from being occupied, we are of the view that the order must 
be complied with.      Mr, Sachthey, learned counsel appearing for the 
appellants, submits that if a Receiver is appointed, immediately the 
possession shall be delivered to him.
4.	Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the 
nature of order passed by this Court, we appoint Smt. Gulab Bai, 
widow of     Sh. Kamal Chand, as Receiver to comply with the order 
of this Court and possession of the suit property which was injuncted 
from being occupied and vacated by the Punjab National Bank shall 
now be restored to her  within four weeks from this date.  If the 
possession is delivered to the Receiver appointed by this Court, the 
order of attachment passed by this Court on 14th of December, 2006 
shall stand released.  We, however, request the trial court, where the 
suit is now pending, to dispose of the suit within one year from the 
date of supply of a copy of this order.
5.	The appeal is thus disposed of.  There will be no order as to 
costs.

