
Supreme Court of India
R &amp; B Falcon (A) Pty Ltd vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 6 May, 2008Author: S Sinha
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Lokeshwar Singh Panta
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (civil)  3326 of 2008

PETITIONER:
R &amp; B Falcon (A) Pty Ltd.

RESPONDENT:
Commissioner of Income Tax

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 06/05/2008@
S.B. Sinha &amp; V.S. Sirpurkar
&amp;
J U D G M E N T
REPORTABLE

CIVIL APPEAL NO.   3326       OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.10451 of 2007)


S.B. Sinha, J.

1.	Leave granted.
2.	Interpretation and/or application of the provisions of Section 115WB 
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, 'the Act') providing for imposition 
of tax on 'fringe benefits' is in question herein.  
3.	Before embarking upon the said question, however, we may notice the 
basic fact of the matter. 
	Appellant is incorporated under the laws of the Commonwealth of 
Australia.  It is engaged in the business of providing Mobile Offshore 
Drilling Rig (MODR) along with crew on a day rate charter hire basis to 
drill offshore wells.  The MODR operates offshore (upto 200 nautical miles 
off the coast of India).  Allegedly, having regard to the harsh working 
environment and purported to be in line with global practices typical to such 
industry, the employees who may be residents of various countries including 
Australia, USA, UK, France etc. work on the MODR on a 'commuter basis'.  
They come to India, stay in the Rig for 28 days and go back to their own 
country being their place of residence for a further period of 28 days.  The 
crew or the employees are transported from their home country to the 
MODR in two laps :
-	first is from the nearest designated base city at 
the place of residence in the home country to a 
designated city in India for which the petitioner 
provides free air tickets of economy class and;
-	second is from that city in India to the MODR 
through helicopter especially hired by the 
petitioner for this purpose.

4.	Allegedly, on completion of 28 days, they go back from the Rig to the 
designated base city in their home country in the same manner.  Appellant 
states that no conveyance/transport allowance is paid to them.  
Appellant entered into a contract of supplying MODR along with 
equipment and offshore crew on charter hire basis with Oil and Natural Gas 
Commission, a public sector undertaking, on or about 10.10.2003.  It filed an 
application under Section 245Q(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 before the 
Authority for Advance Ruling (AAR) on the following question :
"Whether transportation cost incurred by the 
petitioner in providing transportation facility for 
movement of offshore employees from their 
residence in home country to the place of work and 
back is liable to Fringe Benefit Tax?"

5.	Chapter XII of the Act providing for income tax on fringe benefits 
was inserted by the Finance Act, 2005.  It came into force with effect from  
1.4.2006.  
6.	Section 115W defines "employer" and "fringe benefit tax".  "Fringe 
Benefit Tax" (FBT) has been defined as a tax chargeable under Section 
115WA.
	Section 115 WA(1) provides for the basis for charge of fringe benefit 
tax in the following terms :
"115WA.(1) In addition to the income-tax charged 
under this Act, there shall be charged for levy 
assessment year commencing on or after the 1st 
day of April, 2006, additional income-tax (in this 
Act referred to as fringe benefit tax) in respect of 
the fringe benefits provided or deemed to have 
been provided by an employer to his employees 
during the previous year at the rate of thirty per 
cent on the value of such fringe benefits.
(2) Notwithstanding that no income-tax is payable 
by an employer on his total income computed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, the tax 
on fringe benefits shall be payable by such 
employer."

 Section 115WB consists of three sub-sections, the relevant clauses 
whereof read as under:
"Section 115WB - Fringe benefits (1) For the 
purposes of this Chapter, "fringe benefits" means 
any consideration for employment provided by 
way of-

(a) 	any privilege, service, facility or amenity, 
directly or indirectly, provided by an 
employer, whether by way of reimbursement 
or otherwise, to his employees (including 
former employee or employees);

(b) 	any free or concessional ticket provided by 
the employer for private journeys of his 
employees or their family members; and

xxx			xxx			xxx	

(2) The fringe benefits shall be deemed to have 
been provided by the employer to his employees, if 
the employer has, in the course of his business or 
profession (including any activity whether or not 
such activity is carried on with the object of 
deriving income, profits or gains) incurred any 
expense on, or made any payment for, the 
following purposes, namely:-

(A) 	entertainment;

xxx			xxx			xxx	
	
(F) 	conveyance;

xxx			xxx			xxx	

(Q) 	tour and travel (including foreign travel).;

(3) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the 
privilege, service, facility or amenity does not 
include perquisites in respect of which tax is paid 
or payable by the employee or any benefit or 
amenity in the nature of free or subsidised 
transport or any such allowance provided by the 
employer to his employees for journeys by the 
employees from their residence to the place of 
work or such place of work to the place of 
residence".

7.	Before the AAR, a circular issued by the Central Board of Direct Tax 
(CBDT) bearing No.8 of 2005, was relied upon by both the parties.  We will 
refer to a part of it.  The circular provides for explanatory notes on 
provisions relating to fringe benefit tax.  
The object for imposition of the said tax is stated to be as under:
"The taxation of perquisites or fringe benefits is 
justified both on grounds of equity and economic 
efficiency.  When fringe benefits are under-taxed, 
it violates both horizontal and vertical equity.  A 
taxpayer receiving his entire income in cash bears 
a higher tax burden in comparison to another 
taxpayer who receives his income partly in cash 
and partly in kind, thereby violating horizontal 
equity.  Further, fringe benefits are generally 
provided to senior executives in the organization.  
Therefore, under-taxation of fringe benefits also 
violates vertical equity.  It also discriminates 
between companies which can provide fringe 
benefits and those which cannot thereby adversely 
affecting market structure.  However, the taxation 
of fringe benefits raises some problems primarily 
because-
(a)	all benefits cannot be individually attributed to 
employees, particularly in cases where the 
benefit is collectively enjoyed;
(b)	of the present widespread practice of providing 
perquisites, wherein many perquisites are 
disguised as reimbursements or other 
miscellaneous expenses so as to enable the 
employees to escape/reduce their tax liability; 
and
(c)	of the difficulty in the valuation of the 
benefits."

8.	The heading of paragraph 11 of the said circular is "Frequently asked 
questions".  The questions which were posed and answered and in turn are 
relevant for our purpose read as under :
"In terms of the provisions of sub-section (1) of 
Section 115WA, an employer in India is liable to 
FBT in respect of the value of fringe benefits
(a)	Provided by him to his employees; and
(b)	Deemed to have been provided by him to his 
employees.
The scope of fringe benefits provided or deemed to 
have been provided is defined in section 115WB.  
Sub-section (1) of the said section defines the 
scope of fringe benefits provided by the employer 
to his employees.  Similarly, sub-section (2) of the 
said section defines the scope of fringe benefits 
deemed to have been provided by the employer to 
his employees. Therefore, sub-section (2) expands 
the scope of sub-section (1) through a deeming 
provision.
The provision relating to the computation of the 
value of the fringe benefits is contained in section 
115WC.  It is a settled principle of law that where 
the computation provisions fail, the charging 
section cannot be effectuated.  Therefore, if there 
is no provision for computing the value of any 
particular fringe benefit, such fringe benefit, even 
if it may fall within clause (a) of sub-section (1) of 
section 115WB, is not liable to FBT.
XXX			XXX			XXX
19.	FBT is payable in the year in which the 
expenditure is incurred irrespective of whether the 
expenditure is capitalized or not.  However, the 
same expenditure will not be liable to FBT again 
in the year in which it is amortized and charged to 
profit.
Is FBT payable by an Indian Company having 
employees based both in and outside India on its 
total (global) expenditure incurred by it for the 
purposes referred to in clauses (A) to (P) of sub-
section (2) of section 115B?
20.	FBT is payable on the value of fringe 
benefits provided or deemed to have been provided 
to employees based in India and determined on a 
presumptive basis in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 115WC of the Income-tax 
Act.  The value of such fringe benefits is 
determined, inter alia, as a proportion of the total 
amount of expenses incurred for some identified 
purposes.  In the case of an Indian company having 
employees based both in India and in a foreign 
country, FBT is payable on the proportion (50 per 
cent, 20 per cent or 5 per cent, as the case may be) 
of the total amount of expenses incurred for the 
purposes referred to in clauses (A) to (P) of sub-
section (2) of section 115WB and attributable to 
the operations in India.  If the company maintains 
separate books of account for its Indian and 
foreign operations, FBT would be payable on the 
amount of expenses reflected in the books of 
account relating to the Indian operations.  If 
however, no separate accounts are maintained, the 
amount of expenses attributable to Indian 
operations would be the proportionate amount of 
the global expenditure.  Further, such 
proportionate amount shall be determined by 
applying to the global expenditure the proportion 
which the number of employees based in India 
bears to the total worldwide employees of the 
company.
Whether an Indian company carrying on business 
outside India would be liable to FBT even though 
none of its employees in such business may be 
liable to pay income tax in India?
21.	An Indian company would be liable to the 
FBT in India if it has employees based in India.  
Therefore, if an Indian company carries on 
business outside India but does not have any 
employees based in India, such company would 
not be liable to FBT in India.
Does FBT apply to foreign companies?
XXX			XXX			XXX
103. FBT is a liability qua employer.  It is an 
expenditure laid out or expended wholly and 
exclusively for the purposes of the business or 
profession of the employer.  However, sub-clause 
(ic) of clause (a) of section 40 of the Income-tax 
Act expressly prohibits the deduction of the 
amount of FBT paid, for the purposes of 
computing the income under the head profits and 
gains of business or profession.  This prohibition 
does not apply to the computation of book profit 
for the purposes of section 115JB.  Accordingly, 
the FBT is an allowable deduction in the 
computation of book profit under section 115JB of 
the Income-tax Act.
Whether expenditure incurred by the employer for 
the purposes of providing free or subsidized 
transport for journeys to employees from their 
residence to the place of work or such place of 
work to the place of residence would attract FBT?"

9.	AAR by reason of its judgment and order dated 13.12.2006 holding 
that the company is liable to pay fringe benefit tax for providing 
transportation and movement of offshore employees for their residence and 
home countries outside India to the place of rig and back, opined that 
(1) 	The exemption provision contained in sub-section (3) of Section 
115WB is restricted to sub-section (1) whereas the exemption falls 
under the deeming provision contained in sub-section (2); 
(2) 	Residence within the meaning of the said provision would mean 
residence in India and as the employees concerned are residents of the 
countries outside India, sub-section (3) of Section 115WB is not 
applicable.
10.	Mr. S. Ganesh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, 
would submit; 
(1) 	The AAR committed an error of law insofar as it failed to consider 
that sub-section (3) covers both the contingencies envisaged under 
sub-sections (1) and (2); 
(2)  	The distinction between sub-sections (1) and (2) is highly artificial 
inasmuch as the exemption is provided for in clauses (F) and (Q) of 
sub-section (2) of Section 115WB and unless the said provisions are 
read into sub-section (3), the same would be rendered otiose; 
(3) 	While granting exemption, the Parliament having not restricted the 
operation of sub-section (3) only to the regular employees or the 
transport provided by the employer, no restrictive meaning can be 
given to sub-section (3).  
(4) 	Residence of an employee being not restricted to the Territory of 
India, the AAR committed a serious error of law in passing the 
impugned judgment.  
(5)	CBDT itself, in its circular, having clarified that sub-section (2) is 
merely an expansion of sub-section (1), it was impermissible for the 
AAR to take the said factor into account.  
(6)	From the questions and answers contained in the said circular, it is 
evident that fringe benefit tax would be applicable on the value of 
fringe benefit provided or deemed to have been provided to 
employees based in India and no fringe benefit tax would be payable 
in respect of an expenditure incurred by the employer for an employee 
who is not based in India and in any event if the employee is based in 
a foreign country would also come within the purview thereof.  
(7)	The AAR is clearly wrong in holding that the word 'residence' would 
mean only residence in India.
11.	Mr. G.E. Vahanavati, learned Solicitor General appearing on behalf of 
the respondent, on the other hand, would urge:
(A)	Fringe benefit tax is a new concept in terms whereof any 
consideration for employees provided, inter alia, for facility or 
amenity comes within the purview thereof; and
(B)	The tax is payable only when the employer incurs an expenditure 
delineated in sub-section (2) and such exemption is to be granted only 
on the tax leviable under sub-section (1).  
(C)	The terms 'residence', 'transport', 'conveyance' etc. must be given a 
broad meaning which would lead to the conclusion that only when 
employees are provided for transport on a regular basis for attending 
to their work from the place of their residence to the place of work, 
exemption should be granted.  
(D)	The Parliament, in its wisdom, having used the words 'employees, 
journey, the same would only mean that on any journey undertaken by 
the employees for regularly attending the works and not on a work on 
periodic basis.  
12.	Fringe benefit tax is a new concept. The taxes to be levied on the 
fringe benefit provided or deemed to have been provided by an employer to 
employees during the previous year is at the rate of 30 per cent on the value 
of such fringe benefits.  The object for imposition of the said tax, as is 
evident from the said circular dated 29.8.2005, was to bring about an equity.  
The intention of the Parliament was to tax the employer who, on the one 
hand, deducts the expenditure for the benefit of the employees including 
entertainment, etc. and on the other when the employees getting the perks 
are to be taxed, those who get direct or indirect benefits from the 
expenditures incurred by the employer, no tax is leviable.  As stated in the 
objective, it is for bringing about a horizontal equity and not a vertical 
equity.  
13.	Sub-section (1) of Section 115WB contains the interpretation section.  
It is in two parts.  It provides for a direct meaning, as also an expanded 
meaning.  Expanded meaning of the said provision is contained in sub-
section (2).  Whereas sub-section (1) takes within its sweep any 
consideration for employment, inter alia, by way of privilege service, facility 
or amenity directly or indirectly, sub-section (2) thereof expands the said 
definition stating as to when the fringe benefit would be deemed to have 
been provided.  The expansive meaning of the said term 'benefits' by reason 
of a legal fiction created also brings within its purview, benefits which 
would be deemed to have been provided by the employer to his employees 
during the previous year.  Indisputably, sub-section (3) refers to sub-section 
(1) only.  Ex facie, it does not have any application in regard to the matters 
which have been brought within the purview of the fringe benefit tax by 
reason of application of the deeming provision.  We are concerned here with 
a question in regard to grant of exemption in respect of 'conveyance' as 
provided for in clause (F) of sub-section (2) and 'tour and travel' which is 
provided for in clause (Q) of sub-section (2) of Section 115WB.
14.	CBDT categorically states in answer to question number 7 that sub-
section (2) provides for an expansive definition.  
Does it mean that sub-section (2) is merely an extension of sub-
section (1) or it is an independent provision?  If sub-section (2) is merely an 
extension of sub-section (1), Mr. Ganesh may be right but we must notice 
that Section 115WA provides for imposition of tax on expenditure incurred 
by the employer or providing its employees certain benefits.  Those benefits 
which are directly provided are contained in sub-section (1).  Some other 
benefits, however, which the employer provides to the employees by 
incurring any expenditure or making any payment for the purpose 
enumerated therein in the course of his business or profession, irrespective 
of the fact as to whether any such activity would be carried on a regular 
basis or not, e.g., entertainment would, by reason of the legal fiction created, 
also be deemed to have been provided by the employer for the purpose of 
sub-section (2).  Whereas sub-section (1) envisages any amount paid to the 
employee by way of consideration for employment, what would be the limits 
thereof are only enumerated in sub-Section (2).  We, therefore, are of the 
opinion that sub-sections (1) and (2), having regard to the provisions of 
Section 115WA as also sub-section (3) of Section 115WB, must be held to 
be operating in different fields.  
15.	We must test the submissions of Mr. Ganesh from another angle.  The 
learned counsel contended that any benefit or amenity in the nature of free or 
subsidized transport provided by the employer to his employee for the 
purposes mentioned in sub-section (3) are to be found only in clauses (F) 
and (Q) of sub-section (2) and if that be so, the statute must be held to 
envisage grant of exemption in respect of matters which do not form the 
subject matter thereof.
	We have noticed the factual matrix of the instant case.  The 
employees concerned are experts in their field.  They are necessarily 
residents of other country.  They are brought to the Rig by providing air 
tickets for their coming from their place of residence to the Rig.
	The employer incurs the said expenditure as of necessity.  It, 
therefore, clearly falls within the purview of the words 'consideration for 
employment'.  If fringe benefits are provided for consideration for 
employment, which is given or provided to the employee by way of an 
amenity, reimbursement or otherwise; clearly clause (a) of sub-section (1) 
shall be attracted.  
A statute, as is well known, must be read in its entirety.  What would 
be the subject matter of tax is contained in sub-sections (1) and (2).  Sub-
section (3), therefore, provides for an exemption.  There cannot be any doubt 
or dispute that the latter part of the contents of sub-section (3) must be given 
its logical meaning.  What is sought to be excluded must be held to be 
included first.  If the submission of learned Solicitor General is accepted, 
there would not be any provision for exclusion from payment of tax any 
amenity in the nature of free or subsidized transport.
16.	Thus, when the expenditure incurred by the employer so as to enable 
the employee to undertake a journey from his place of residence to the place 
of work or either reimbursement of the amount of journey or free tickets 
therefor are provided by him, the same, in our opinion, would come within 
the purview of the term 'by way of reimbursement or otherwise'.  
The Advanced Law Lexicon defines "otherwise" as: 
"By other like means; contrarily; different from 
that to which it relates; in a different manner; in 
another way; in any other way; differently in other 
respects in different respects; in some other like 
capacity."

"Otherwise" is defined by the Standard Dictionary as meaning 'in a 
different manner, in another way; differently in other respects'; by Webster, 
'in a different manner; in other respects'.  
As a general rule, 'otherwise' when following an enumeration, should 
receive an ejusdem generis interpretation (per CLEASBY, B. Monck v. 
Hilton, 46 LJMC 167, The words 'or otherwise', in law, when used as a 
general phrase following an enumeration of particulars, are commonly 
interpreted in a restricted sense, as referring to such other matters as a are 
kindred to the classes before mentioned, (Cent. Dict.)"
17.	It is now a well settled principle of law that a statute should ordinarily 
be given a purposive construction.  {See New India Assurance Company 
Ltd. v.  Nusli Neville Wadia and Anr. [2007 (14) SCALE 556]; Tanna and 
Modi v. C.I.T., Mumbai XXV and Ors. [2007 (8) SCALE 511] and Udai 
Singh Dagar and Ors. v. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. [2007 (7) SCALE 
278]}.
18.	The Parliament, in introducing the concept of fringe benefits, was 
clear in its mind in so for as on the one hand it avoided imposition of double 
taxation, i.e., tax both on the hands of the employees and employers; on the 
other, it intended to bring succour to the employers offering some privilege, 
service, facility or amenity which was otherwise thought to be necessary or 
expedient.  If any other construction is put to sub-sections (1) and (3), the 
purpose of grant of exemption shall be defeated.  If the latter part of sub-
section (3) cannot be given any meaning, it will result in an anomaly or 
absurdity.  It is also now a well settled principle of law that the court shall 
avoid such constructions which would render a part of the statutory 
provision otiose or meaningless.  [See Visitor and Ors. v. K.S. Misra [(2007) 
8 SCC 593]; Commissioner of Sales Tax, Delhi and Ors. v. Shri Krishna 
Engg. Company and Ors. [(2005) 2 SCC 692].
19.	We, therefore, are of the opinion that AAR was right in its opinion 
that the matters enumerated in sub-section (2) of Section 115WB are not 
covered by sub-section (3) thereof, and the amenity in the nature of free or 
subsidized transport is covered by sub-section (1).
20.	It brings us to the next question, namely, whether the employee 
concerned should be a resident of India.  The statute does not say so.  Fringe 
benefit tax being a tax on expenditure; the only concern of the revenue 
wherefor should be as to whether such expenditure has been made.  
Appellant has a permanent establishment in India.  It pays income-tax in 
India.  It carries on business in India.  It has for the purpose of carrying out 
its business activities engaged persons from within India or outside India.  If 
it makes any expenditure for bringing any employee from abroad, the same 
would also liable to be taken into consideration for the purpose of sub-
section (1) of Section 115WB.
21.	AAR with respect was not correct in its view in reading the words 'in 
India' after the word residence in sub-section (3).
22.	If the reasonings of the AAR are taken to its logical conclusion, the 
CBDT circular would not be attracted.  An employer cannot afford to loose 
on both the fronts.  Its right to claim exemptions either would be in respect 
of the employees who are based in India or who are not.  If the said 
employees are required to be based in India, sub-section of Section 115WB 
would not be attracted.  However, if such expenditure incurred is found to be 
as consideration for employment, the same would also bring within its 
purview the employees who have been hired from outside the country.  For 
the purpose of obtaining the benefit of the said exemption, however, the 
expenditure must be incurred on the employees directly for the purposes 
mentioned therein, namely, they are to be provided transport from their 
residence to the place of work or such place of work to the place of 
residence.  Any expenditure incurred for any other purpose, namely, other 
than for their transport from their residence to the place of work or from the 
place of work to the place of residence would not attract the exemption 
provision.  The Assessing Authority, therefore, must, in each case, would 
have a right to scrutinize the claim.  
CBDT has the requisite jurisdiction to interpret the provisions of 
Income-tax Act.  The interpretation of CBDT being in the realm of executive 
construction, should ordinarily be held to be binding, save and except where 
it violates any provisions of law or is contrary to any judgment rendered by 
the courts.  The reason for giving effect to such executive construction is not 
only same as contemporaneous which would come within the purview of the 
maxim temporania caste pesto, even in certain situation a representation 
made by an authority like Minister presenting the Bill before the Parliament 
may also be found bound thereby.
23.	Rules of executive construction in a situation of this nature may also 
be applied.  Where a representation is made by the maker of legislation at 
the time of introduction of the Bill or construction thereupon is put by the 
executive upon its coming into force, the same carries a great weight. 
24.	In this regard, we may refer to the decision of the House of Lords in 
the matter of R.V. National Asylum Support Service [(2002) 1 W.L.R.2956] 
and its interpretation of the decision in Pepper v. Hart [(1993) A.C. 593]. on 
the question of 'executive estoppel'. In the former decision, Lord Steyn 
stated:-
"If exceptionally there is found in the Explanatory 
Notes a clear assurance by the executive to 
Parliament about the meaning of a clause, or the 
circumstances in which a power will or will not be 
used, that assurance may in principle be admitted 
against the executive in proceedings in which the 
executive places a contrary contention before a 
court."

25.	A similar interpretation was rendered by Lord Hope of Craighead in 
Wilson v. First County Trust Ltd., [2004] 1 A.C. 816, wherein it was stated:- 
"As I understand it [Pepper v. Hart], it recognized 
a limited exception to the general rule that resort to 
'Hansard' was inadmissible. Its purpose is to 
prevent the Executive seeking to place a meaning 
on words used in legislation which is different 
from that which ministers attributed to whose 
words when promoting the legislation in 
Parliament" 

For a detailed analysis of the rule of executive estoppel useful 
reference may be to the article authored by Francis Bennion entitled 
"Executive Estoppel: Pepper v. Hart revisited", published in Public Law, 
Spring 2007, pg. 1 which throws a new light on the subject matter.
26.	We may notice a decision of this Court in Sedco Forex International 
Drill. Inc. &amp; Ors. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Dehradun &amp; Anr. 
[(2005) 12 SCC 717], the question which arose therein was as to the salary 
paid to the employees of UK National Services for field breaks outside India 
would be subjected to tax under Section 9(1)(ii) and explanation appended 
thereto as inserted in 1983 w.e.f 1.4.1979.  Appellant therein entered into 
agreements which are executed in the United Kingdom with each of the said 
employees who were residents of the said country.  This Court, upon 
noticing the explanation appended to Section 9(1)(ii), as regards its 
retrospective operation, held:
"16. The departmental understanding of the effect 
of the 1999 Amendment even if it were assumed 
not to bind the respondents under Section 119 of 
the Act, nevertheless affords a reasonable 
construction of it, and there is no reason why we 
should not adopt it.
17. As was affirmed by this Court in Goslino 
Mario a cardinal principle of the tax law is that the 
law to be applied is that which is in force in the 
relevant assessment year unless otherwise 
provided expressly or by necessary implication. 
(See also Reliance Jute and Industries Ltd. v. CIT) 
An Explanation to a statutory provision may fulfil 
the purpose of clearing up an ambiguity in the 
main provision or an Explanation can add to and 
widen the scope of the main section. If it is in its 
nature clarificatory then the Explanation must be 
read into the main provision with effect from the 
time that the main provision came into force. But if 
it changes the law it is not presumed to be 
retrospective, irrespective of the fact that the 
phrases used are "it is declared" or "for the 
removal of doubts"."

27.	It was categorically held that as the explanation sought to give an 
artificial meaning to "earned in India" and brings about a change effectively 
in the existing law, it should not be held to have any retrospective operation.  
Section 115WB does not contain such a provision.  It must, therefore, be 
given its natural meaning.  It would, therefore, be difficult to accept the 
contention of the learned Solicitor General that the employees must be based 
in India.
28.	However, it appears that the contention that such expenditure should 
be paid on a regular basis or what would be the effect of the words 
'employees journey' did not fall for consideration of AAR.  What, therefore, 
is relevant would be the nature of expenses.  The question as to whether the 
nature of a travelling expenditure incurred by the appellant would attract the 
benefits sought to be granted by the statute did not and could not fall for 
consideration of the AAR.  Its opinion was sought for only on one issue.  It 
necessarily had to confine itself to that one and no other.  No material in this 
behalf was brought on record by the parties.  Whether the payments were 
made to them on a regular basis or whether the expenditures incurred which 
strictly come within the purview of Section 115WB or not must, therefore, 
be answered having regard to the materials placed on records.  If any 
question arises as to whether the agreement entered into by and between the 
appellant and the employees concerned would attract, in given cases, the 
liability under FBT benefit tax would have, thus, to be determined by the 
assessing authority.
29.	The appeal is allowed to the aforementioned extent and with the 
aforementioned observations.  In the facts and circumstances of this case, 
there shall be no order as to costs.
+
5 3322 2008
!
Lachhman Singh (Deceased)through Legal Representatives &amp; Ors
Vs.
Hazara Singh (Deceased) through Legal Representatives &amp; Ors
@
May 6, 2008


BENCH:
S.B. Sinha &amp; Lokeshwar Singh Panta

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T
REPORTABLE

CIVIL APPEAL NO.     3322          OF 2008
(Arising out of SLP (C) No.1395 of 2007)


S.B. Sinha, J.


1.	Leave granted.
2.	What would be the period of limitation in a suit for redemption of 
mortgage in the factual matrix involved in the present case is the question in 
this appeal which arises out of a judgment and order dated 19.7.2006 passed 
by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in RSA No.1340 of 1980.
3.	A transaction of mortgage in respect of the suit property admeasuring 
58 kanals 11 marlas was entered into by and between the predecessors in the 
interest of the parties herein.  The actual date of execution of the deed of 
mortgage was not known to the plaintiffs-respondents.  However, the said 
mortgaged properties were mutated in the name of the mortgagees on or 
about 19.3.1913.
4.	A suit for redemption of the said mortgage was filed by the 
respondents on or about 30.12.1970.  The learned trial court, as also the First 
Appellate Court, dismissed the said suit as being barred by limitation 
opining that the actual date of mortgage being not known, a decree for 
redemption of mortgage could not be passed.
5.	The High Court, however, in the second appeal preferred thereagainst 
by the respondent herein, formulated the following substantial questions of 
law :
"1.	Whether the finding recorded by the learned 
first Appellate Court regarding relationship 
is sustainable?
2.	Whether the suit for possession by way of 
redemption is within the period of 
limitation?"

6.	It was held that in view of the fact that the relationship between the 
parties as mortgagor and mortgagee was proved, the onus to prove that suit 
was barred by limitation was on the defendants.
The said Second Appeal on the said finding was allowed.
7.	Mr. Shambhu Prasad Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of 
the appellant, would submit that the question of limitation being one of 
jurisdiction, the High Court committed a serious error in allowing the said 
second appeal.  It was submitted that as the date of mutation was not the date 
of mortgage, the suit should have been held to be barred by limitation.
8.	Mr. Manoj Swarup, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 
respondents, on the other hand, has drawn our attention to an application 
filed by the respondent for adduction of additional evidence, as envisaged 
under Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code of Civil Procedure and submitted that 
the deed of mortgage which was registered in Village Pangota, Tehsil Taran 
Taran in the District of Amritsar, now in Pakistan, could be procured by the 
respondents which, if taken into consideration, would clearly establish that 
the suit was within the prescribed period of limitation having been executed 
on 20.2.1913.  
The relationship between the parties is not in dispute.  Respondents 
filed the aforementioned suit for a decree for redemption of mortgage on 
payment of a sum as may be found due to the appellants herein.  The details 
of the mortgage were furnished but the actual date of mortgage being not 
known could not be furnished.  
Sohan Singh and Bahadur Singh were the original mortgagors.  Sohan 
Singh is said to have been not seen 10 years prior to the institution of the suit 
and, thus, presumed to be dead.  Respondents are said to have inherited the 
properties of the said mortgagors and, thus, stepped into their shoes.  In the 
written statement, the respondent denied and disputed the relationship 
between the parties, stating :
"1.	Para No.1 of the plaint is wrong and 
incorrect.  The suit land is not of the plaintiffs.  
Rather the total land is under the permanent 
continuing possession of defendant No.1.  The 
land in dispute as mentioned in para No.1 of the 
plaint filed by the plaintiffs never mortgaged with 
the defendants and the facts mentioned in para 
No.1 of the plaint regarding the alleged mortgaged 
are forged and fictitious one and the plaint is not 
with me."

9.	The defendant claimed the ownership as also possession of the suit 
land in himself.  The courts below, as noticed hereinbefore, found that there 
existed a relationship of mortgagor and mortgagee between the parties to the 
lis.  The suit was dismissed only on the ground of being barred by limitation.  
The High Court was, in our opinion, entirely wrong in holding that the 
onus to prove that the suit was beyond the period of limitation was on the 
defendants.  Limitation is a question of jurisdiction.  Section 3 of the 
Limitation Act puts an embargo on the court to entertain a suit if it is found 
to be barred by limitation.
10.	It appears that before the High Court also, an application for 
adduction of additional evidence was filed.  No order thereupon was passed.  
Respondents, in our opinion, have made out a case for adduction of 
additional evidence.  
It was stated that the mortgage deed was registered in the year 1913 in 
the District of Lahore.  As it is a registered document, this Court in a 
situation of this nature, keeping in view the findings of the courts below, 
should allow the said application.  
11.	There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the court should be 
loathed to entertain such an application but the respondents have herein 
made out adequate grounds therefor.  
The jurisdiction of the Appellate Court is to be exercised not only 
when clause (a) or clause (aa) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 27 of Order 41 of the 
Code is attracted but also when such a document is required by the appellate 
Court itself to pronounce judgment or for any other substantial cause.  If 
what the respondents contended is correct, namely, the mortgage was 
executed in 1913, the period of limitation having been prescribed under the 
old Limitation Act, namely, 60 years being the period of limitation having 
regard to the provisions of the new Limitation Act, the suit could be filed 
within a period of seven years from 1.1.1964, i.e. upto 1.1.1971.  As the suit 
was filed on 30.12.1970, it may be held to be within the prescribed period of 
limitation.
12.	We are of the opinion that keeping in view the peculiar facts and 
circumstances of this case, the respondents should be permitted to adduce 
evidence.  We, therefore, set aside the impugned judgment and remit the 
matter back to the High Court directing it to take the additional evidence on 
record either allowing the parties to adduce evidence before it or to prove the 
said documents by the trial judge in terms of Order 41 Rule 28 of the Code.  
Appeal is allowed to the above extent.  No costs.

