
Supreme Court of India
Liyakat vs State Of Uttaranchal on 25 February, 2008Author: . A Pasayat
Bench: Dr. Arijit Pasayat, P. Sathasivam
           CASE NO.:
Appeal (crl.)  378 of 2008

PETITIONER:
Liyakat

RESPONDENT:
State of Uttaranchal

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 25/02/2008

BENCH:
Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT &amp; P. SATHASIVAM

JUDGMENT:
J U D G M E N T

CRIMINAL APPEAL NO 378                OF 2008
(Arising out of S.L.P (Crl.) No.3314 of 2006)
With
Criminal Appeal No.379               of 2008
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) 3316 of 2006)


Dr. ARIJIT PASAYAT, J. 

1.	Leave granted.
2.	These two appeals are directed against the common 
judgment of the Uttranchal High Court.

3.	Challenge in this appeal is to judgment of a Division 
Bench of the Uttaranchal High Court which disposed of 
Criminal Reference No. 2 of 2004 and two Criminal Appeal 
Nos. 45 and 46 of 2002.  The two criminal appeals were filed 
by Liyakat the present appellant and co-accused Smt. Zahira.  
The reference was necessitated as the Learned Additional 
District and Sessions Judge, Ist Fast Track Court Hardwar 
has awarded death sentence to the accused Liyakat.                                                                                                                                                        
awarded death sentence to accused Liyakat.  He had also 
awarded sentences of imprisonment for life to Zahira and the 
accused No. 3.  Both of them were convicted for offences 
punishable under Sections 302 and 201 of the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (in short the 'IPC').  The trial court, however had 
acquitted Accused Nos. 2 and 4 namely Riyasat and Jeewani.

4.	Noor Alam was child of PW 1 Rashid and his wife PW 2 
Nasreen.  PW 1 Rashid and PW2 Nasreen used to reside in the 
neighbourhood of Jeewani, original accused No. 4. On the 
fateful day i.e. on 12th day of January, 1999, Nasreen was 
sitting alongwith her child in the courtyard of Gulami's house, 
who is husband of original accused no.4 Jeewani. At that time 
Zaheera, Jiwani, Liyakat and Riyasat were also there. Her 
husband Rashid, P.W. 1 came there and asked his wife to go 
with him to feed fertilizer to the standing crop in the field. 
However, Nasreen declined to go with him as there was nobody 
to lookafter Noor Alam. Hearing this, Jeewani and other 
accused persons told that they will look after the child and she 
could leave the child with them. P.W.3 Brahm Pal and one 
Rishipal were also there at that time. The child was left by 
Nasreen with the accused persons and she left the place 
alongwith her husband. When both of them returned at about 
4 O'clock, they straightaway went to the house of Gulami and 
enquired about Noor Alam. Accused told them that Noor Alam 
was playing in the vicinity only. However, they could not find 
the child. They searched for the child for the rest of the day 
and night and even on 13th of January, 1999, but to no effect. 
However, in the morning of 14th, when Rashid was searching 
for child alongwith Brahmpal, Bhagwan and Yasin, they 
searched the house or hut of Liyakat and saw that in the 
northern corner of that hut, foot of small child was protruding 
out of the ground. Seeing this Rashid reached to the Police 
Station, Laksar and reported the matter.

5.	 A case was registered on that basis and the Incharge of 
the Police out-post (Chauki) was informed on wireless and 
received the message.  O.P. Sisodia PW 8 with other officials 
reached the house of the accused and in presence of the 
witnesses, body of Noor Alam, which was buried in the pit in 
the northern corner of the hut was recovered. Panchnama and 
other formalities were completed and on that very day all the 
accused persons were arrested.

6.	The prosecution relied on eight witnesses. They being the 
parents of the child PW 1 Rashid and PW 2 Nasreen and two 
other witnesses PW 3 Brahm Pal and PW 4 Rishipal. They all 
supported the prosecution story.  Besides them, PW 6 Dr. R.K. 
Pande is the medical officer, who had conducted post mortem 
on the dead body and PW 7 Rishipal and PW 8.  O.P. Sisodia 
are the police witnesses.

7.	Case of the prosecution in short was that appellant 
Liyakat, Riyasat, Zahira and Jeewani committed murder of 
Noor Alam a child aged about 1= years, the deceased and they 
buried to the body of the child with an idea of screening the 
act.  The trial court accepted the prosecution version in part 
so far as the appellant and Zahira are concerned but directed 
acquittal of the co-accused.  The trial court found that the 
evidence was clear and cogent and therefore the appellant 
Liyakat was given life sentence and Zahira was given death 
sentence.  Since the sentence of death was awarded, the 
reference was made to the High Court for confirmation in 
terms of Section 367 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(in short the 'Cr.P.C.').

8.	The High Court by the impugned judgment altered the 
death sentence awarded to appellant Liyakat life sentence. It 
however upheld the sentence of life imprisonment awarded to 
Zahira.

9.	In support of the appeal learned counsel for the appellant 
submitted that the case based on circumstantial evidence and 
the circumstances highlighted by the trial court and the High 
Court do not warrant a conclusion that the appellants were 
responsible for the murder of the child.

10.	With reference to the medical evidence, it was submitted 
that this was not a case of strangulation and therefore the 
conclusion of killing the child of suffocation cannot be 
maintained.

11.	The circumstances which were highlighted against the 
appellant was the fact that the child was left in the custody of 
the appellants, the dead body was found buried in the 
premises of the appellants.  No explanation by way of 
suggestion in cross examination or in the examination under 
Section 313 Cr.P.C. was offered as to how the dead body was 
found buried in the hut of the accused which was in his 
exclusive use.

12.	Following circumstances were highlighted by the 
prosecution to substantiate its accusations:

(1)	That the child Noor Alam was handed over in
the custody of the accused persons at about
1 O'clock by the parents;

(IA)	That the child was either a toddler or a
crawling boy;

(2)	That the child was missing barely within
three hours after he was given in the custody
of the accused persons;

(3)	That there was no explanation given by the
accused for the missing of the boy to the
parents and they only casually replied that
the child must have been playing somewhere
else;

(4)	That the dead-body of the child was found
buried in the hut, which was in the use and
occupation of the accused persons;

(5)	That there is no explanation whatsoever as to
how his body came to be buried in the hut of
these accused persons;

(6)	That the unsubstantiated defence raised by
the appellant no.2 Zaheera suggesting the
alibi, which could not be proved at all and
has been rightly disbelieved by the trial
Court;

(7)	That the child died unnatural and homicidal 
death due to suffocation and that the child 
had died even before it was buried.

13.	 Before analysing the factual aspects it may be stated 
that for a crime to be proved it is not necessary that the crime 
must be seen to have been committed and must, in all 
circumstances be proved by direct ocular evidence by 
examining before the court those persons who had seen its 
commission. The offence can be proved by circumstantial 
evidence also. The principal fact or factum probandum may be 
proved indirectly by means of certain inferences drawn from 
factum probans, that is, the evidentiary facts. To put it 
differently, circumstantial evidence is not direct to the point in 
issue but consists of evidence of various other facts which are 
so closely associated with the fact in issue that taken together 
they form a chain of circumstances from which the existence 
of the principal fact can be legally inferred or presumed. 
14.	It has been consistently laid down by this Court that 
where a case rests squarely on circumstantial evidence, the 
inference of guilt can be justified only when all the 
incriminating facts and circumstances are found to be 
incompatible with the innocence of the accused or the guilt of 
any other person. (See Hukam Singh v. State of Rajasthan 
(1977)2 SCC 99), Eradu v. State of Hyderabad (AIR 1956 SC 
316), Earabhadrappa v. State of Karnataka [(1983) 2 SCC 330], 
State of U.P. v. Sukhbasi [AIR 1985 SC 1224], Balwinder Singh 
v. State of Punjab[AIR 1987 SC 350] and Ashok Kumar 
Chatterjee v. State of M.P. [AIR 1989 SC 1890]. The 
circumstances from which an inference as to the guilt of the 
accused is drawn have to be proved beyond reasonable doubt 
and have to be shown to be closely connected with the 
principal fact sought to be inferred from those circumstances. 
In Bhagat Ram v. State of Punjab [AIR 1954 SC 621] it was laid 
down that where the case depends upon the conclusion drawn 
from circumstances the cumulative effect of the circumstances 
must be as to negative the innocence of the accused and bring 
the offences home beyond any reasonable doubt. 
15.	We may also make a reference to a decision of this Court 
in C. Chenga Reddy v. State of A.P. [1996 (10) SCC 193] 
wherein it has been observed thus: (SCC pp.   206-07, para 
21) 
"21. In a case based on circumstantial 
evidence, the settled law is that the 
circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is drawn should be fully proved and such 
circumstances must be conclusive in nature. 
Moreover, all the circumstances should be 
complete and there should be no gap left in the 
chain of evidence. Further, the proved 
circumstances must be consistent only with 
the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused and 
totally inconsistent with his innocence." 

16.	In Padala Veera Reddy v. State of A.P. [AIR 1990 SC 79] it 
was laid down that when a case rests upon circumstantial 
evidence, such evidence must satisfy the following tests: (SCC 
pp.   710-11, para 10) 
"(1) the circumstances from which an inference 
of guilt is sought to be drawn, must be 
cogently and firmly established;  
(2 ) those circumstances should be of a definite 
tendency unerringly pointing towards guilt of 
the accused;  
(3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, 
should form a chain so complete that there is 
no escape from the conclusion that within all 
human probability the crime was committed 
by the accused and none else; and  
(4) the circumstantial evidence in order to 
sustain conviction must be complete and 
incapable of explanation of any other 
hypothesis than that of the guilt of the 
accused and such evidence should not only be 
consistent with the guilt of the accused but 
should be inconsistent with his innocence." 

17.	 In State of U.P. v. Ashok Kumar Srivastavaii [1992(2) SCC 
86] it was pointed out that great care must be taken in 
evaluating circumstantial evidence and if the evidence relied 
on is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour of 
the accused must be accepted. It was also pointed out that the 
circumstances relied upon must be found to have been fully 
established and the cumulative effect of all the facts so 
established must be consistent only with the hypothesis of 
guilt.  

18.	 Sir Alfred Wills in his admirable book Wills' 
Circumstantial Evidence (Chapter VI) lays down the following 
rules specially to be observed in the case of circumstantial 
evidence: 
"(1) the facts alleged as the basis of any legal 
inference must be clearly proved and beyond 
reasonable doubt connected with the factum 
probandum; (2) the burden of proof is always 
on the party who asserts the existence of any 
fact, which infers legal accountability; (3) in all 
cases, whether of direct or circumstantial 
evidence the best evidence must be adduced 
which the nature of the case admits; (4) in 
order to justify the inference of guilt, the 
inculpatory facts must be incompatible with 
the innocence of the accused and incapable of 
explanation, upon any other reasonable 
hypothesis than that of his guilt; and (5) if 
there be any reasonable doubt of the guilt of 
the accused, he is entitled as of right to be 
acquitted." 

19.	 There is no doubt that conviction can be based solely on 
circumstantial evidence but it should be tested on the 
touchstone of law relating to circumstantial evidence laid 
down by this Court as far back as in 1952. 

20. In Hanumant Govind Nargundkar v. State of M.P. [AIR 1952 
SC 343] it was observed thus: (AIR pp.   345-46, para 10) 
"It is well to remember that in cases where the 
evidence is of a circumstantial nature, the 
circumstances from which the conclusion of 
guilt is to be drawn should in the first instance 
be fully established, and all the facts so 
established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, 
the circumstances should be of a conclusive 
nature and tendency and they should be such 
as to exclude every hypothesis but the one 
proposed to be proved. In other words, there 
must be a chain of evidence so far complete as 
not to leave any reasonable ground for a 
conclusion consistent with the innocence of 
the accused and it must be such as to show 
that within all human probability the act must 
have been done by the accused." 

21.	 A reference may be made to a later decision in Sharad 
Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1984 SC 
1622]. Therein, while dealing with circumstantial evidence, it 
has been held that the onus was on the prosecution to prove 
that the chain is complete and the infirmity of lacuna in 
prosecution cannot be cured by false defence or plea. The 
conditions precedent in the words of this Court, before 
conviction could be based on circumstantial evidence, must be 
fully established. They are: (SCC p.   185, para 153) 
( 1 ) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to 
be drawn should be fully established. The circumstances 
concerned must or should and not may be established;  
( 2 ) the facts so established should be consistent only with the 
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that is to say, they 
should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that 
the accused is guilty;
( 3 ) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and 
tendency;  
( 4 ) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the 
one to be proved; and 
( 5 ) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to 
leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent 
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all 
human probability the act must have been done by the 
accused. 
22.	The above position was highlighted in State of Rajasthan 
v. Raja Ram [2003(8) SCC 180].
23.	It has been rightly noted by the trial court and the High 
Court that the accused persons were absolutely silent and no 
explanation was offered as to how the body came to be buried 
in their hut which was in their exclusive user.  

24.	Similarly the non-explanation of this vital circumstance 
adds to the chain of circumstances.  It is now settled law that 
if the deceased was in the custody or in the company of the 
accused, then the accused must supply some explanation 
regarding the disappearance of the deceased.

25.	In the factual background, it is considered in the light of 
the decisions referred to above, the inevitable conclusion is 
that the appeals are sans merit, deserve dismissal which we 
direct.  We record our appreciation for the able manner in 
which Mr. Y.P. Singh, learned Amicus Curiae assisted the 
case.

