
Supreme Court of India
Moidenkutty vs State Of Kerala on 28 August, 2008Author: ......................J.
Bench: S.B. Sinha, Cyriac Joseph
                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                      CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                        CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 216 OF 2005


                Moidenkutty       ...Appellant

                                        Versus

                State of Kerala   ...Respondent


                                     O R D E R

                       This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
23.9.2004 passed by a Division Bench of the High Court of Kerala in Crl.A.No.
974/2004 whereby and whereunder the appeal preferred by the appellant herein from
the judgment of conviction and sentence dated 11.6.2004 passed by the Additional
Sessions Court (Fast Track Court No.1), Manjeri in S.C.No.23/2000 was allowed in
part.

                       The deceased is the brother of the appellant herein. They were
living with their parents and sister in the 'tharavad' house. It appears that the
accused and the appellant were living in different premises only at a little distance.
The house of the accused-appellant is closer to their family house than the house of
the deceased.

                       The incident appears to have taken place at about 9 p.m. on
19.7.1998. The motive therefor is said to be not only a property dispute between the
brothers but also discovery by the appellant that the deceased-Hussain peeped into
the bathroom where the daughter-in-law of the accused-appellant was taking bath. It
is also alleged in the First
Information Report that in regard to the said incident the


                                          -1-
wife of the appellant had quarrelled with the deceased. The appellant had asked the
deceased not to enter into his house resulting in an altercation. However, they were
separated at that time by their father.

                          It appears from the records that    for serving dinner to his
parents he came late on that date with some sweets and placed the same on the
doorsteps of the house. The deceased again started quarrelling with the accused
asking as to why he was asked not to enter his house. He caught hold of the collar of
the accused and made attempts to assault him with a stick, which was concealed
under his shirt. Allegedly, at that point of time, the appellant stabbed him twice
resulting in his death.

                          The father of the appellant died during pendency of the matter
before the trial Court. The mother(P.W.1) of the appellant, who was examined by the
prosecution was declared hostile. The sister of the appellant appears to have lost her
mental balance.

                          Although, the mother of the appellant was declared hostile and
despite the fact that no other person had witnessed the occurrence, a judgment of
conviction and sentence for commission of an offence under Section 302 I.P.C. was
recorded by the Addl.District &amp; Sessions Judge(Fast Track Court), Manjeri.
                          The High Court, however, in an appeal preferred by the
appellant opined that from the materials on record it was evident that the deceased
had been waiting with a stick in the 'tharavad' house for the accused to come and
when he came, he wanted to assault him and as the incident had happened at that
point of time, the appellant committed an offence under Section 304 Part 1 I.P.C. On
that finding
                                             -2-




conviction and sentence under Section 302 I.P.C. was set aside. The High Court
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of
Rs. 5,000/-.
            Although, the State has not preferred any appeal against the judgment of
the High Court, we have been taken through the materials on record and keeping in
view the facts and circumstances of this case, we do not find any reason to differ with
the view of the High Court.
            The only question which arises for consideration is the quantum of
sentence.
            It is stated at the Bar that the appellant has been in custody for about five
years. We, therefore, are of the opinion that the interest of justice would be subserved
if the appeal is allowed in part modifying the sentence to the period already
undergone by the appellant. It is directed accordingly. If the appellant is in custody,
he may be released forthwith unless wanted in connection with any other case.
                                                                                 ......................J.
                                                [S.B. SINHA]


                                                        .....................J
                       [ CYRIAC JOSEPH ]

New Delhi,
August 28, 2008.

