
Supreme Court of India
Shivanand Gaurishankar Baswanti vs Laxmi Vishnu Textile Mills &amp; Ors on 11 July, 2008Bench: C.K. Thakker, D.K. Jain
                                                          REPORTABLE


            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


           CIVIL APPEAL NO. 4324 OF 2008
                   ARISING OUT OF
    SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 12629/2007


SHIVANAND GAURISHANKAR BASWANTI             ... APPELLANT

VERSUS

LAXMI VISHNU TEXTILE
MILLS &amp; ORS.                               ... RESPONDENTS



                   J U D G M E N T

C.K. THAKKER, J.

1.          Leave granted.


2.          The present appeal is directed against

summary dismissal of writ petition No. 5664 of

2006 on February 12, 2007 by the High Court of

Judicature at Bombay observing that it was not

a     fit   case   to   entertain    the     petition   in

exercise     of    extraordinary    jurisdiction     under

Article 226 of the Constitution.
                                                                 2



FACTUAL BACKGROUND

3.           The case has a chequered history and

with     a   view    to     appreciate         the    contentions

raised       by    the    parties,       the     background      is

required      to    be    kept   in      view.       Laxmi   Vishnu

Textile Mills (`Company' for short)--respondent

No.1 herein was formerly known as Vishnu Cotton

Mills Ltd. It was registered on May 19, 1908

under the Indian Companies Act, 1873 (then in

force).      It    was    operating      through       two    cotton

textile mills, namely, (i) Laxmi Mill, and (ii)

Vishnu Mill. Somewhere in the year 1961, Laxmi

Mill was merged in Vishnu Mill and was given

the    present      name    i.e.    Laxmi       Vishnu       Textile

Mills Ltd. There were large number of workers

in the mill and there was considerable profit

in     the   business.      By     the    passage       of    time,

however, the Company started incurring losses

and    things      turned    worse       in    later    eighties.

Proceedings under the Sick Industrial Companies
                                                                   3
(Special       Provisions)        Act,       1985    (hereinafter

referred       to     `SICA')    had     been       initiated.      On

April 28, 1994, the Board of Industrial and

Financial Reconstruction, New Delhi (`BIFR' for

short) issued an order declaring the Company as

`sick unit' and in exercise of powers conferred

on     it    under     Section        22A    of     the    Act,    it

restrained           the      promoters/management                from

disposing or transferring its assets described

in the order without prior permission of the

Board. It was also stated that violation of the

order passed by the Board would be dealt with

under Section 33 of SICA.

4.           It is also the case of the appellant

that        without     issuing        notice        and    without

obtaining       permission            from    the     Appropriate

Authority as required under Sections 25-O and

25-N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the

management of the Company resorted to illegal

closure and lockout of the Company. Thus, from

February       28,    1995,     the    Company       is    illegally

closed.
                                                                     4
5.          According            to     the        appellant,       BIFR

considered the facts and circumstances of the

case in their entirety and on December 30, 1996

passed an order recording its satisfaction as

required by sub-section (1) of Section 20 of

the   Act    that      it       was    not       possible    for     the

Company to revive and it was just and equitable

that Company should be wound up. The opinion

was forwarded to the High Court of Judicature

at    Bombay      with      a     request          that    banks     and

financial         institutions               may        explore      the

possibility       of     sale         of   the      assets    of     the

Company. It was proposed to entrust the work of

sale of assets to State Bank of India (SBI),

the lead bank in the case. The Operative Agency

(OA), namely, IDBI was directed to hold a joint

meeting      of     all          participating             banks     and

financial      institutions                and      to     furnish       a

detailed     report         on    sale        of    assets    of     the

Company     through         SBI       latest       by    February    28,

1997.
                                                             5
6.           It may be stated at this stage that

SBI    was    one     of    the   major     creditors.       It

initiated      recovery       proceedings        against     the

Company by filing Original Application No. 2638

of 1999 and got a decree from Debt Recovery

Tribunal (DRT)-1, Mumbai for a sum of Rs.84.39

crores       with      interest.         Other      financial

institutions had also initiated proceedings for

recovery of their dues. Receiver was appointed

by DRT-1, Mumbai, who took possession of the

properties     of     the    Company.    Steps     were     also

taken to protect properties by employing police

force. The Receiver also met representatives of

Rashtriya Girni Kamgar Sangh, recognized Union--

respondent     No.8    herein.     The    Receiver    was     in

possession      of     the     property     except         those

properties which were occupied by the employees

who were in service of the Company and were

residing in the quarters provided to them while

they   were    in    employment.     Possession       of     the

machinery and other movable properties of the

Company was also taken over. Since the dues of
                                                            6

workers were neither settled nor paid, several

workers approached Controlling Authority under

the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 for gratuity.

Orders were passed in their favour directing

the Company to pay full amount of gratuity with

interest thereon. The said amount was also not

paid.   Meanwhile,       Trans   Asia     Global    Company--

respondent        No.7     expressed     its     desire      to

purchase     the     property.     According        to      the

appellant,        respondent     No.8--Union        had      no

authority to represent the interests of workers

of respondent No.1--Company and yet on March 8,

2005, it purportedly entered into a tripartite

agreement         with      respondent         No.1--Company,

respondent No.8--Union and respondent No.7-M/s

Trans   Asia      Global    Company.    Respondent        No.1-

Company under the tripartite agreement sold the

property     to     respondent     No.7     for     Rs.46.65

crores. The claim of the workmen was settled at

Rs.22.21 crores whereas in fact, the claim of

the workmen was more than Rs.132 crores. The

purported agreement never brought to the notice
                                                              7

of the workmen and they were kept in complete

dark. The property of the Company was worth

Rs.250 crores which could have satisfied claims

of SBI, legitimate dues of the workmen as also

of financial institutions and other creditors.

According to the appellant, the other agreement

was     also   entered    into       between       secured    and

unsecured      creditors,       labour       representatives,

the   Company    and     the   purchaser        on   April    20,

2005.    The   agreement       states       that    all   secured

creditors,            unsecured             creditors         and

representatives of the workmen had a meeting

and   they     all    agreed   on     One    Time    Settlement

(OTS) and accepted the scheme of selling the

entire     property      by      a    private        treaty    to

respondent No.7 and accordingly the property

was   sold.     The    action,       however,      was    totally

illegal, uncalled for and in contravention of

various provisions of law.

PIL WRIT PETITION
                                                                    8
7.        According to the appellant, as soon as

he came to know about the above agreements,

sale of property by private negotiations and

without       taking     workers       in      confidence,          he

submitted a representation to the Chief Justice

of High Court of Bombay pointing out several

illegalities       committed         by     respondent           No.1--

Company in not settling the dues of workmen.

The representation was converted into Public

Interest Litigation (PIL) and was registered as

PIL    Writ     Petition      No.      126       of      2005.     The

appellant herein filed an affidavit in the said

petition on June 27, 2006. The writ petition

came up for hearing before a Division Bench of

the    High    Court    on    July    13,      2006      and     after

hearing learned counsel for the parties, the

writ   petition        was   disposed       of      by   the     Court

observing      that    the    grievance        of     the   workers

could be redressed before `appropriate forum'.

The    complaint       against       sale      of     property      by

private   treaty       also    could      be     adjudicated        in

`proper proceedings' and the controversy did
                                                                          9

not   deserve          to    be    taken       into      PIL.    Liberty,

however,     was        granted          by    the       Court    to     all

aggrieved         parties           to        pursue       `appropriate

remedy' for redressal of their grievances.

PRESENT WRIT PETITION

8.          The         appellant,             thereafter,             filed

present Writ Petition No. 5664 of 2006 in the

High Court of Bombay under Article 226 of the

Constitution            and        prayed          for    a      writ     of

certiorari        or        any     other          appropriate         writ,

direction or order quashing all the actions in

the matter of recovery proceedings before the

Recovery Officer, Mumbai Debt Recovery Tribunal

No.1 and by examining the validity, propriety

and   correctness             of    such       proceedings         and    to

quash and set aside order of sale of properties

--movable        and        immovable--of          respondent          No.1--

Company in favour of respondent No.7. A writ of

mandamus was sought directing DRT-1, Mumbai not

to    disburse         any     amount         to    anyone       till    the

claims      of     the        workers         have       been    properly
                                                            1

adjudicated and the amount paid. A prayer was

made to continue to employ all workers till

their services are legally terminated or till

lawful closure is effected. Interim relief was

also prayed.

ORDER OF HIGH COURT

9.         The    High     Court,    as    observed    above,

dismissed the writ petition observing that it

was not a fit case to interfere with by an

order dated February 12, 2007 in exercise of

extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of

the Constitution. The said order is challenged

by the appellant in this appeal.

10.        Notice    was    issued    by    this    Court    on

September 7, 2007 and meanwhile order passed by

DRT   was        stayed.     Affidavits       and     further

affidavits       were      thereafter      filed      by    the

parties. The Registry was directed to place the

matter for final disposal and that is how the

matter is before us.

11.        We have heard learned counsel for the

parties.
                                                                   1

APPELLANT'S SUBMISSIONS

12.         Learned      counsel       for      the        appellant

contended that all orders passed and actions

taken by the Authorities are unlawful, illegal

and contrary to law. It was submitted that the

first     respondent-Company             had     resorted          to

illegal   closure      and      unlawful       lockout       due    to

which workers had suffered a lot. It was also

submitted       that     when     proceedings          had        been

initiated under SICA and an order was passed by

BIFR    restraining       the    management           of    the    1st

respondent-Company                from           transferring,

alienating or disposing its property, no action

could have been taken for sale of the property.

Apart from the fact that such action is illegal

and in violation of the order passed by BIFR,

it is also contrary to law and is punishable

under Section 33 of SICA. A grievance was also

made that though there were several secured and

unsecured       creditors        and     more     than         4,000

workers, whose dues had not been paid, they

were    never    taken    in     confidence       and        private
                                                               1

settlement     had    been    arrived      at.    Such     action

could not be said to be legal or in consonance

with    law.   Moreover,      the    property      of    the   1st

respondent-Company          which    is    worth    more    than

Rs.250 crores had been sold away by a `throw

away' price of less than Rs.50 crores. It has

prejudicially affected the interest of families

of     thousands      of     workers       who     would     have

otherwise got their legitimate dues but for the

illegal    settlement        by     `interested'        persons.

According to the appellant, most of the workers

were not in favour of so called settlement of

acceptance     of    an    amount     of    Rs.22.21       crores

towards full and final settlement of their dues

when they were actually entitled to six times

more the said amount. Respondent No.7 could not

have represented all the workers and entered

into such settlement by accepting less than 20%

of their dues. According to the appellant, most

of   the   workers     have       objection      against    such

settlement      and        they     have     supported         the

appellant and several employees had expressed
                                                             1

their opinion in writing to that effect. The

appellant had stated that when he came to know

about the decree passed by DRT and execution

proceedings in pursuance of the said decree and

sale of property, he drew the attention of the

Hon'ble Chief Justice of High Court of Bombay

by making a representation which was treated as

PIL Writ Petition. The High Court ought to have

granted      relief     in   that    proceeding.     The    High

Court, however, disposed of the writ-petition

by    granting     liberty      to   the   parties     to   take

appropriate proceedings in accordance with law.

The appellant, therefore, filed fresh petition

but    the    High      Court   by    a    `cryptic'    order,

dismissed the same without entering into the

merits       of   the    matter.      It   was,    therefore,

submitted by the appellant that the impugned

order passed by the High Court deserves to be

set aside quashing and setting aside the order

of sale in favour of respondent No.7 and by

directing the authorities to decide the matter

afresh in accordance with law.
                                                                  1



RESPONDENTS' SUBMISSIONS

13.        The     contesting       respondents,            on    the

other    hand,     strongly       urged      that     the    appeal

deserves to be dismissed and no interference by

this Court is called for. The appellant has no

locus standi to file a petition either in the

High    Court     or    to     prefer   an    appeal        in   this

Court. It was contended that respondent No.1--

Company was in continuous loss since several

years and in the year 1995, it was closed down.

Crores of rupees were required to be paid to

State      Bank        of      India,        other      financial

institutions as also to workers. Proceedings

had    been   initiated         under   SICA    and     BIFR     was

satisfied that the Company could not be revived

and it favoured winding up of the Compny. A

decree was passed in favour of SBI by DRT-1,

Mumbai    for     substantial       amount      of     more      than

Rs.80 crores with interest. Over and above the

said     amount,       there     were   other        secured      and

unsecured creditors. Moreover, outstanding dues
                                                                    1

of    workers      were     also       there.         Movable       and

immovable      property        of    the     Company         was    not

enough    to     clear    up     all      the     dues.      It    was,

therefore, felt that a fair settlement could be

arrived at so that all the parties could get an

equitable      share      and       proper       and     reasonable

amount from the property owned and possessed by

respondent No.1-Company. It is in the light of

the   above      facts    that      the    parties         i.e.,   (i)

Company; (ii) Secured and unsecured creditors;

and   (iii)     Union     sat    together,           discussed      the

problem and settled the matter. SBI which was

having a decree for Rs.84 crores with interest

thereon, agreed to let go substantial part of

the     amount     so     that       workers         may     not    be

prejudicially       affected.        Other        creditors        also

adopted positive and constructive attitude. The

Union     considered       the      fate        of     families     of

several     workers        and      in      the       capacity       of

`Representative           Union'          under        the     Bombay

Industrial Relations Act, 1946 exercised the

power and agreed to the settlement. In fact, it
                                                                   1

was   the     case      of     respondent     No.7-Union          that

during    the      intervening       period       of     about     one

decade after the closure of the Mills in 1995,

about 400 workers died. If settlement would not

have been arrived at, it would have resulted

into further agony to the remaining workers and

their families as also the families of those

workers     who         lost    their    lives          during     the

pendency      of     proceedings.        It       was     in     these

circumstances that the best solution had been

thought by way of settlement and no fault can

be    found     against         Representative           Union      in

agreeing to such settlement.

14.         It was also submitted that under the

Act of 1946, it is the Representative Union

which alone has exclusive right in any industry

to represent the entire class of workmen in the

local    area.       The     appellant      had    no     locus    or

standing to agitate grievance or raise dispute

on    behalf       of    workers/labourers.              But,    even

otherwise, a representation which was treated

as PIL Writ Petition was dismissed by the High
                                                                       1

Court and that order had never been challenged

by the appellant by approaching this Court and

the decision had become final. It was contended

that from the order of the Court it was very

clear    that       liberty       was     granted       to    aggrieved

parties        to      take       appropriate            remedy,        in

appropriate forum in appropriate proceedings.

The     appellant,             however,     neither          approached

Labour       Forum        nor      went     to     Debt        Recovery

Appellate         Tribunal        but     filed    a     fresh       writ-

petition. Obviously, the subsequent petition in

which the impugned order is passed was not PIL

as     it     was         registered        as     Writ        Petition

instituted        by      an    individual.        The       High    Court

was,        therefore,           wholly     right           and      fully

justified in dismissing the said petition in

limine, particularly in the light of the order

passed in previous PIL Writ Petition.

15.          It     was    submitted        that       the    situation

today    is    irreversible             inasmuch       as    after     the

settlement          had    been     arrived       at     between       the

parties,       the        purchaser-respondent                No.7     had
                                                            1

deposited the entire purchase price with DRT.

The secured creditors as well as labourers were

paid their dues as per the said settlement and

their respective shares. Creditors had issued

`discharge certificates'. The Assistant Labour

Commissioner had disbursed the amount to the

workers and their family members who are more

than four thousand. The appellant who was also

one     of   the    workers       was    paid     more     than

Rs.60,000/- and he issued a receipt in token of

acceptance of the said amount. The order of

sale in favour of respondent No.7 was confirmed

by    DRT    and    the    sale     became      final.     Sale

certificate was also issued in favour of the

purchaser.     It    had    also    paid     an   amount     of

Rs.2.25 crores towards stamp duty and got the

property     registered      in    its   name.    All    those

orders were never challenged by the appellant

by taking `appropriate proceedings'. If at this

stage, this Court interferes and sets aside the

orders passed by the authorities from time to

time,    irreparable       injury    and   loss    would     be
                                                           1

caused    not   only    to   the    purchaser-respondent

No.7, but to other respondents as well. For

instance, it would be very difficult for the

workers who had received the amount to refund

or pay back the said amount which would be the

direct consequence. It would be difficult for

respondent No.7 also if it will not be able to

recover the amount which it has paid. Moreover,

no   secured    or     unsecured    creditor      has     come

forward and has made a complaint to this Court

that though he was entitled to a particular

amount,    he   had    not   been    paid   and     he     has

grievance against the settlement. The appellant

who is only one person and has received his

dues,     has   approached    the    High   Court        under

Article 226 of the Constitution after dismissal

of Public Interest Litigation and it is he who

contends that several creditors have not been

paid their dues and workers have also suffered

and the settlement should be set aside. It was

submitted that the High Court was right in not

entertaining such petition and this Court, in
                                                                  2

exercise       of     power      under    Article    136    of   the

Constitution, may not interfere with the said

order.

CONSIDERATION OF RIVAL CONTENTIONS

16.           Having heard the learned counsel for

the parties and having gone through the records

and proceedings of the case, in our opinion,

this     is     not       a    fit    case   for    exercise       of

discretionary and equitable jurisdiction under

Article 136 of the Constitution.

17.           It is clear that so far as the present

proceedings are concerned, they are not in the

nature    of        por   bono       publico.      The   appellant

herein had made representation to the Hon'ble

Chief Justice of High Court of Judicature at

Bombay        earlier         which    was   treated       as    Writ

Petition (PIL) and the petition was disposed of

by the Court granting liberty to the aggrieved

parties        to     approach         appropriate       forum     in

appropriate          proceeding         without     granting      any

relief.             Prima      facie,     therefore,       in     our
                                                                 2

opinion,        the    contention         of   the       contesting

respondents           is    well-founded          that     if    the

appellant       herein       was    aggrieved        by     certain

orders passed by Debt Recovery Tribunal (DRT)-

I, Mumbai, he ought to have approached Debt

Recovery Appellate Tribunal (DRAT) by filing

appeals     against        those    orders.          If    he   had

grievance against the Company or inaction on

the part of the Authorities under Labour Laws

on the ground that they had not protected the

interests of workers of Laxmi Vishnu Textile

Mills,     he    ought      to     have    approached        Labour

Forum.      The appellant, however, did neither.

As soon as the PIL Writ Petition was disposed

of,   within      few      days,   he     filed    another      writ

petition in his individual capacity.                      The High

Court, in our opinion, therefore, was right in

dismissing it in limine by passing the impugned

order that it was not a fit case to exercise

extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of

the Constitution.

MERITS OF THE MATTER
                                                      2
18.       On merits also, we find no substance

in the contention raised by the learned counsel

for the appellant.          From the record, it is

clear that from eighties the respondent No. 1-

Company was in financial doldrums. Day-by-day,

the position deteriorated and it had incurred

heavy losses. So much so that the Mill was

required to be closed down somewhere in 1995.

Admittedly, after February, 1995, the Company

has never revived. It is also clear from the

record    that   substantial     amount   was   due   and

payable by the Company to State Bank of India,

several other financial institutions, secured

and     unsecured    creditors     and    to    workers.

Proceedings had been initiated under SICA. BIFR

had passed orders from time to time and finally

it recommended winding up of the Company on

being    satisfied   that    rehabilitation     of    the

Company was not possible. A recommendation was,

therefore, made and papers were forwarded to

the High Court concerned, i.e. the High Court

of Judicature at Bombay.         It is further clear
                                                                2

that in favour of one major creditors, i.e.

State Bank of India a decree was passed by DRT-

I,    Mumbai    for    Rs.84.39       crores       with   interest

thereon. It has been brought on record that

several        other     financial          institutions        had

approached DRT and either orders were passed in

their favour or proceedings were pending.                       It

is brought to our notice that many workers had

gone to Controlling Authority under the Payment

of Gratuity Act, 1972 and obtained orders in

their    favour       directing       the   first     respondent

Company to pay gratuity with interest thereon.

The Company was not in a position to pay entire

dues.      In    the     circumstances,          DRT-I,     Mumbai

ordered to take appropriate steps so that joint

meeting    of     all     financial         institutions        and

representatives         of    workers       be     held   and   the

matter could be settled.              Meanwhile, respondent

No.   7-Trans     Asia       Global    Trade       expressed    its

desire to purchase the property. On March 8,

2005, a tripartite agreement had been arrived

at      between         respondent           No.      1-Company,
                                                              2

representatives        of     respondent     No.8-Union       of

workers and Trans Asia Global Trade-intending

purchaser. In the agreement it was stated that

the Company had huge liability and there were

several secured creditors. The property owned

by the Company was not enough to meet with all

liabilities. The representatives of respondent

No.8 Union were aware of the said fact and

agreed    to   accept       amount    of   Rs.22.21     crores

towards full and final settlement of dues of

workers. Respondent No. 7 decided to purchase

the     property      for     Rs.46.65      crores.          The

agreement was executed on March 8, 2005 and

signed    by    all     the     three      parties    to     the

agreement,     i.e.    by     the    Mill-Company,     by    the

purchaser       of      property           and      also      by

representatives        of    respondent      No.8    Union.       A

joint     meeting      of      secured      and      unsecured

creditors      was    also    held    on   April     20,    2005

wherein secured and unsecured creditors of the

first respondent-Company agreed to share sale

proceeds of Rs.46.65 crores by accepting and
                                                                     2

finalizing         One    Time    Settlement        (OTS).        Final

decision       was       taken     on     the      basis     of      the

agreement arrived at earlier on March 8, 2005.

It    was      decided      to     sell      the     property         to

respondent No.7 for Rs.46.65 crores. The amount

which was to be paid as per the final agreement

came as under;

      Institutions/B              Principa              Rs.    (in
      anks/                       l O/S                 Crore)
      Labour                      On                    Proposed
                                  31.3.199              share
                                  9
      SBI                           28.05                 14.02
      IDBI                           4.08                 2.04
      ICICI                           1.24                0.61

      IFCI                            1.28                0.63
      IIBI                            1.54                0.76
      Labour                                              22.21
      Bank           of               1.50                0.50
      Maharashtra
      MSEB                            5.37                4.00


      Sales Tax                                           0.99
      Solapur                                             0.89
      Municipal
      Corporation
      and
      Octroi
                                 GRAND TOTAL                46.65


19.           On   October       6,     2005,      an     order      was

passed by Recovery Officer, DRT-I, Mumbai in
                                                                2

which all the above facts had been stated. The

Recovery        Officer       referred        to      tripartite

agreement and payment of amount to creditors

and workers. The order also recited that as per

the direction of the High Court, the workers'

claim     was    to    be    adjudicated       by        DRT.   The

applicant       Bank   was,     therefore,         directed      to

issue advertisement and invite workmen as per

the     guidelines     formulated        by    DRT.       All   the

workers were directed to lodge their claims in

appropriate format in the Tribunal and all such

claims were ordered to be placed before the

Presiding Officer for adjudication.

20.        Regarding        valuation     of       property,     it

was stated;

      "Since the valuation was done in the
      year 2002, before considering the
      proposal, the property was valued
      again from the approved valuer from
      the panel of DRT. According to the
      valuation   report,    offer of   the
      purchaser   is   above   the distress
      valuation price".

21.        It    was   mentioned     that          the    Tribunal

accepted the offer of M/s Trans Asia Global
                                                             2

Trade    for     purchasing     movable      and    immovable

property    of    the    Company      in   the     custody    of

Receiver    appointed     by    DRT    for   an     amount    of

Rs.47.82       crores.   The    auction-purchaser            had

deposited the amount of Rs.47,81,57,777 towards

sale    consideration     and   other       expenses.        The

recovery officer directed the purchaser to pay

balance amount. The matter was adjourned for

confirmation of sale. An order was passed to

send report to BIFR after confirmation of sale.

The above order has not been challenged by the

appellant in accordance with the provisions of

1993 Act.

22.        On December 6, 2005, again, the matter

was placed before the Recovery Officer, DRT-I,

Mumbai. Reference was made to all proceedings,

settlement arrived at between the parties and

sale of property for Rs.47.82 crores. It was

noted that no objection had been received from

any    person    under   Rule   60,    61    or    62   of   the

Second Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 1961 for

setting aside sale and the sale was required to
                                                            2

be     confirmed.        Accordingly,       the    sale     was

confirmed. Even this order was not challenged

under the Act.

23.        On    January    20,     2006,    the    Recovery

Officer,        DRT-I,     Mumbai        issued     a     sale

certificate for immovable property for Rs.45

crores in favour of respondent No.7-Purchaser.

Another     certificate      of     sale     for        movable

properties      for   Rs.2.82     crores    was    issued    by

DRT. Those orders have remained unchallenged

except in the present proceedings.

 24.       The learned counsel for the appellant

strenuously urged that on April 28, 1994, BIFR

had issued interim order restraining the first

respondent-Company                from            alienating,

transferring or disposing the property of the

Company without prior permission of the Board.

It was stated that if any action would be taken

in violation of the said order, it would be

punishable under Section 33 of SICA. In view of

the said order, neither the property could have

been sold without the prior permission of BIFR
                                                               2

nor such sale could have been confirmed.                        It

was     also     urged   that     even     under     1993     Act,

Recovery Officer could not have permitted or

confirmed sale and it could have been done only

by     the     Debt   Recovery      Tribunal.        Hence,    all

proceedings were non est and are required to be

ignored altogether.

25.           The learned counsel for the contesting

respondents, on the other hand, submitted that

the order passed by BIFR was merely an interim

order and in 1996, it directed winding up of

the Company and forwarded its opinion to the

High Court. Moreover, no such point had been

taken by the appellant earlier. As discussed

above, even prior to the present petition which

had been filed by the appellant-herein in the

High         Court    under      Article       226      of     the

Constitution, he had submitted a representation

to the Chief Justice which was registered as

PIL Writ Petition. No such contention was taken

in     that      petition.       Even     in    the      present

proceedings,          what    was       contended       by     the
                                                       3

appellant before the High Court was as regards

a transaction under which property was sold by

Chairman of the first respondent-Company Mr.

M.L.     Apte    through   his    constituted     Attorney

Kantilal Shankarlal Shah.           Nothing was stated

as to other properties.

26.        But    even     on    merits,   the    impugned

action calls for no interference.                The order

dated April 28, 1994 passed by BIFR reads as

under;

       "Whereas     a    draft     scheme    for
       rehabilitation of M/s Laxmi Vishnu
       Textile    Mills   has  been    prepared,
       circulated and published by the Board
       under    Section    18   of    the   Sick
       Industrial       Companies       (Special
       Provisions) Act, 1935 in pursuance of
       its proceedings held/orders face in
       the case on 14.2.1994.

       And whereas, the Board is of the
       opinion   that   in  the   interest   of
       rehabilitation of the sick industrial
       company, creditors, shareholders as
       also   in   public   interest,   it   is
       necessary   to   direct   the   existing
       promoters/management       of       sick
       industrial company; M/s Laxmi Vishnu
       Textile Mills not to disposed of,
       except with the consent of the Board,
       any of its fixed and other assets
       charged/hypothecated to the financial
       institutions,     banks    and     other
                                                        3

      creditors, the board, in exercise of
      powers conferred on it by Section 22A
      of   the   Sick   Industrial  Companies
      (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 hereby
      directs    the    existing   promoters/
      management     is   invited   to    the
      provisions of Section 33, where under
      violation of any of the orders of the
      Board is punishable in the manner laid
      down therein".


27.       Plain reading of the order makes it

clear that the Board was of the opinion that in

the   interest    of   rehabilitation    of    the     sick

industrial company, its creditors, shareholders

as also in public interest, certain directions

were necessary.        The Company was, therefore,

restrained from disposing the property which

was     charged    /hypothecated        to     financial

institutions.      The submission of the learned

counsel for the contesting respondents is that

there was no question of revival of the Company

in view of order passed by BIFR in 1996 and its

recommendation for winding up of the Company.

Regarding    interests    of   creditors      and    other

persons, it was stated that in March, 2005,

tripartite    agreement     had   been       arrived     at
                                                         3

wherein representatives of labour Union, first

respondent-Mill Company and the purchaser were

present and the agreement was signed by all of

them. Likewise, in April, 2005, joint meeting

of      secured      and        unsecured     creditors,

representatives of Union and vendor and vendee

was held and all of them agreed for OTS and

expressed their willingness to accept lesser

amount. In the circumstances, charge imposed

and prohibition issued by BIFR on the Company

no more remained operative. On October 6, 2005,

therefore,   it   was      observed    by   the    Recovery

Officer of DRT-I, Mumbai to send information to

BIFR after confirmation of sale. Consequential

action of confirmation of sale was thereafter

taken on December 6, 2005 and sale certificate

was also issued on January 20, 2006.               All the

actions were taken only after March/April 2005.

They,   therefore,      could    not   be   said    to   be

contrary to law or in violation of the order

passed by BIFR.
                                                                     3
28.       Even otherwise, on the facts and in

the circumstances of the case, we are fully

satisfied that had the agreements in question

not    been    arrived         at,     all    parties       including

workers for whom great concern had been shown

by the appellant would have suffered. In fact,

in an affidavit filed on behalf of the State

Bank of India, it was stated that in the light

of the decree passed in favour of State Bank of

India    by    DRT-I,      Mumbai,           the    Bank    would    be

entitled to Rs.222.34 crores.                      Similarly, other

institutions were also entitled to substantial

amount. It was because of conjoint and combined

efforts       of   all    the        parties       that    agreements

could    be    arrived         at.    It     was    stated    that       a

Cabinet Minister used his good offices and One

Time    Settlement        (OTS)       had     been    arrived    with

Banks and financial institutions and workmen

were able to get the amount which had not been

paid to them for many years. The contention

that    secured          and    unsecured           creditors       and
                                                           3

workers have not received their dues has no

force.

29.        Again, who has approached this Court?

Neither a secured nor an unsecured creditor.

Nor a representative of a labour union. Nor

even   a   person      acting    pro    bono    publico.   As

already adverted to earlier, PIL Writ Petition

at the instance of the appellant was dismissed

by the High Court and the said decision was

never challenged by him. Here is an employee

who is also one of the workers, who has been

paid     his   dues.      He   accepted   the    amount    of

Rs.62,555/-         and        issued     `No     Objection

Certificate' (No Dues Certificate) -no doubt by

putting        an   endorsement         "Accepted     under

Protest". He has urged that the workmen have

not been paid their dues and injustice had been

done to them. To us, even there, the appellant

is not right. A Representative Union has taken

a decision which is binding on all employees.

That aspect, however, we will deal with at a

later stage.
                                                                      3
30.          The    learned         counsel       strongly         relied

upon a decision of this Court in NGEF Ltd. v.

Chandra Developers (P) Ltd., (2005) 8 SCC 219.

In    that     case,         this        Court    held     that       the

provisions         of    SICA       would    prevail          over    the

provisions of the Companies Act since it is a

special      statute         and     a     `complete       code'       in

itself.       The        Court       also        held     that        the

jurisdiction            of   the     Company       Court       in     the

matters      relating         to    winding       up     of    a     sick

Company would arise only when BIFR or AAIFR

exercises its jurisdiction under Section 20 of

SICA recommending the winding up of the Company

upon arriving at a finding that there does not

exist any chance of revival of the Company.

Referring to Gray's Inn Construction Co. Ltd.,

Re, (1980) 1 All ER 814 : (1980) 1 WLR 711 and

Pankaj Mehra v. State of Maharashtra, (2000) 2

SCC   756,     however,            the    Court    observed          that

"disposition of assets during the interregnum

may not be irretrievably void but the courts
                                                               3

are required to exercise power with caution and

circumspection".

STATUS AND POSITION OF REPRESENTATIVE UNION

31.         The learned counsel for the appellant

contended that respondent No. 8 could not have

agreed      to   accept      a    meager   amount    of    Rs.22

crores when the outstanding dues were more than

Rs.130 crores. It was also stated that majority

of workers are with the appellant and they are

opposed to the settlement. Thousands of workers

have   so    stated     in       writing   and   informed      the

appellant        that   the      grievance    raised      by   the

appellant is well-founded and they are entitled

to much more amount than what had been paid

under the settlement.

32.         Even    this      contention      has   no    force.

The    learned     counsel        for   the   Union,      in   our

opinion, is right in submitting that under the

Bombay Industrial Relations Act, 1946, it is

the `Representative Union' which has all powers

to enter into a settlement on behalf of workers
                                                              3

in the industry and it is only that Union which

can take a decision under 1946 Act.                    The said

decision would bind not only the members of the

Union, but also to those workers who are not

members of such Union.

33.        The     learned          counsel,         in      this

connection, invited our attention to various

provisions of 1946 Act. As the Preamble of the

Act   declares,    the      Act    has    been     enacted   "to

regulate     the     relations          of      employers    and

employees, to make provision for settlement of

industrial disputes and to provide for certain

other   purposes".       The      Act    contains    elaborate

provisions for registration of Unions and their

powers.

34.        Section     2       defines       various      terms.

Chapter II deals with Authorities constituted

or    appointed      under      the      Act.     Chapter     III

provides for registration of Unions. Chapter IV

relates to Approved Unions. Chapter V titles

"Representatives       of    Employers       and    Employees,

and appearance on their behalf".
                                                                       3
35.        Section            27     enables          the          State

Government        to     recognize       any    combination             of

employers     as       Association       of    Employers          in    an

industry in any local area and to represent an

employer      in       any    proceeding       under        the     Act.

Section     27A         correspondingly          provides              for

appearance        on     behalf     of    employees.          It       is,

however, in negative terms and enacts that save

as provided in certain cases (Sections 32 and

33), "no employee shall be allowed to appear or

act in any proceeding under this Act except

through the representative of employees". The

section thus puts an embargo on appearance of

any employee except through the representative

of employees.

36.        Section           14    empowers          Registrar          to

register      a    `Representative             Union'       for        any

`Industry'        in    any    `Local     Area'.       It    is    thus

clear that there can be only one Representative

Union   for       one    Industry        in    one    Local        Area.

Section     30         enumerates        representatives                of

employees and provides for order of preference
                                                     3

in which such representatives are allowed to

appear or act in any `Industry' in any `Local

Area'. It reads thus;

         30. Representative of employees
         Subject to the provisions of section
         33A, the following shall be entitled
         to appear or act] in the order of
         preference     specified    as   the
         representative of employees in an
         industry in any local area-

  (i)        a Representative   Union   for   such
             industry;

  (ii)       a Qualified or Primary union of
             which the majority of employees
             directly affected by the change
             concerned are members;

  (iii) any Qualified or Primary Union in
        respect    of     such    industry
        authorised   in   the   prescribed
        manner in that behalf by the
        employees concerned;

  (iv)         the Labour Officer if authorised
             by the employees concerned;

  (v)            the persons elected by the
             employees in accordance with the
             provisions of section 28 or where
             the proviso to sub-section (1)
             thereof applies, the employees
             themselves;
                                                  4
  (vi)         the Labour Officer:

             Provided -

         Firstly, that the persons entitled to
         appear or act under clause (v) may
         authorise any Qualified or Primary
         Union in respect of such industry to
         appear or act instead of them;

         Secondly,   that   where   the  Labour
         Officer is the representative of the
         employees, he shall not enter into any
         agreement    under   section   44   or
         settlement under section 58 unless the
         terms of such agreement or settlement,
         as the case may be, are accepted by
         them in the prescribed manner;

         Thirdly, where in any proceeding the
         persons entitled to appear or act
         under clause (v) are more than five,
         the prescribed number elected from
         amongst them in the prescribed manner
         shall be entitled to appear or act
         instead.


37.          It is thus clear that Representative

Union is having priority and `preference' over

other Unions to appear on behalf of employees

of such industry in the area. Section 42 in

Chapter VIII provides for change and lays down

procedure for such change. It reads;
                                              4
    42. Notice of change
(1) Any employer intending to effect any
    change in respect of an industrial
    matter specified in Schedule II
    shall give notice of such intention
    in the prescribed form to the
    representative   of   employees.   He
    shall send a copy of such notice to
    the     Chief    Conciliator,     the
    Conciliator    for    the    industry
    concerned for the local area, the
    Registrar, the Labour Officer and
    such   other   person   as   may   be
    prescribed. He shall also affix copy
    of such notice at a conspicuous
    place on the premises where the
    employees affected by the change are
    employed for work and at such other
    place as may be directed by the
    Chief Conciliator in any particulars
    case.

(2) Any employee desiring a change in
    respect of an industrial matter not
    specified in Schedule I or III give
    a notice in the prescribed form to
    the      employer      through      the
    representatives of employees, who
    shall forward a copy of the notice
    to   the    Chief   Conciliator,    the
    Conciliator     for    the     industry
    concerned for the local area, the
    Registrar, the Labour Officer and
    such   other    person   as    may   be
    prescribed.

(3) When no settlement is arrived at in
    any   conciliation   proceeding   in
    regard to any industrial dispute
    which has arisen in consequence of a
    notice relating to any change given
                                              4

      under sub-section (1) or sub-section
      (2), no fresh notice with regard to
      the same change or a change similar
      in all material particulars shall be
      given before the expiry of two
      months   from   the  date   of   the
      completion of the proceeding within
      the meaning of section 63. If at any
      time after the expiry of the said
      period of two months, any employer
      or employee again desires the same
      change or a change similar in all
      material particulars, they shall
      give fresh notice in the manner
      provided in sub-section (1) or (2),
      as the case may be.

(4)    Any employee or a representative
      union] desiring a change in respect
      of (i) any order passed by the
      employer under standing orders, or
      (ii) any industrial matter arising
      out    of    the   application    or
      interpretation of standing orders,
      or   (iii)   an  industrial   matter
      specified in Schedule III, except
      item (5) thereof shall make an
      application to the Labour Court and
      as respects change desired in any
      industrial matter specified in item
      5 of Schedule III, to the Industrial
      Court:

 Provided that no such application shall
 lie   unless     the    employee    or   a
 representative     union   has   in    the
 prescribed    manner     approached    the
 employer with a request for the change
 and no agreement has been arrived at in
 respect   of   the   change   within   the
 prescribed period.
                                                                  4
38.       The aforesaid provisions came up for

consideration       before      this         Court       in    Girja

Shankar     Kashi     Ram      v.   Gujarat          Spinning         &amp;

Weaving Co. Ltd., (1962) Supp 2 SCR 890.                          In

that case, `G' closed its business and sold its

assets to `T'.        The old company discharged all

its workmen when it closed the business.                          The

new    company      re-started         the      business         and

employed all the workmen of the old company.

At the time of closure of `G', a dispute was

pending   between        the   company       and     its      workmen

with   respect      to    bonus.         A    `Representative

Union' of the Textile Workers in the city of

Ahmedabad    filed        an   application           before      the

Labour Appellate Tribunal wherein the dispute

was pending and the matter was sub-judice. The

matter was compromised and `G' consented to pay

agreed bonus. The Representative Union accepted

the amount and gave an undertaking not to claim

compensation     in      future.     Later         on,     however,

about 400 employees issued a notice and claimed

compensation     for      closure.     The     Representative
                                                                     4

Union      appeared        before       the    Labour       Court   and

contended that the application was liable to be

dismissed in view of the compromise arrived at

between      the    Mill       Company        and    Representative

Union.       The Labour Court upheld the objection

and dismissed the application. The order was

confirmed by Industrial Court in appeal as well

as    by    the     High    Court       in     a    petition     under

Article      227.        The     employees          approached      this

Court.

39.          This       Court     considered          the     relevant

provisions         of      the    1946        Act,      the     object

underlying              conferment            of        power        on

Representative Union and the action taken by it

and     held      that     when     a    Representative          Union

appears in any proceeding under the Act, none

else can be allowed to appear not even the

employee at whose instance proceedings might

have been started under Section 42(4) of the

Act.       The Court held that if the Representative

Union appears, the decision taken by that Union

would be final and binding.
                                                4
40.       Explaining the scheme of the Act, the

Court stated;


      "It will be seen that s. 27A provides
      that no employee shall be allowed to
      appear or act in any proceeding under
      the    Act,    except    through    the
      representative of employees, the only
      exception to this being the provisions
      of Sections 32 and 33. Therefore, this
      section completely bans the appearance
      of an employee or of any one on his
      behalf in any proceeding after it has
      once commenced except through the
      representative of employees. The only
      exceptions to this complete ban are to
      be found in Sections 32 and 33; to
      which we shall presently refer. But it
      is clear that bona fides or mala fides
      of the representative of employees can
      have nothing to do with the ban placed
      by Section 27A on the appearance of
      any one else except the representative
      of employees as defined in Section 30
      and that if anyone else can appear in
      any   proceeding   we   must   find   a
      provisions in that behalf in either
      Section 32 or Section 33 which are the
      only exception to Section 27A. It may
      be noticed that there is no exception
      in Section 27A in favour of the
      employee, who might have made an
      application under Section 42(4), to
      appear on his own behalf and the ban
      which is placed by Section 27A will
      apply equally to such an employee. In
      order however to soften the rigour of
      the provisions of Section 27A, for it
      may well be that the representative of
      employees may not choose to appear in
      many   proceedings    started   by   an
                                            4

employee under s. 42(4), exceptions
are provided in ss. 32 and 33. The
scheme   of  these   three  provisions
clearly is that if the Representative
Union appears, no one else can appear
and carry on a proceeding, even if it
be begun on an application under s. 42
(4) but where the Representative Union
does not choose to appear there are
provisions in ss. 32 and 33 which
permit others to appear in proceedings
under the Act.

Section   32    gives     power    to   a
conciliator, a board, a wage board, a
labour court and the industrial court
to permit an individual, whether an
employee or not, to appear in any
proceeding before him or it. This
shows that the complete ban imposed by
s.   27A   can   be   removed    if   the
authorities under the Act think it
expedient to permit another person to
appear and that person may be an
employee or not. Thus the employee who
has made an application under s. 42(4)
may be permitted to appear before the
authorities under the Act; but this
provision is subject to a proviso
namely that no such individual which
would include an employee who has
himself made an application under s.
42(4), shall be permitted to appear in
any    proceeding     in     which    the
Representative Union has appeared as
the   representative     of    employees.
Reading therefore ss. 27A, 30 and 32
together, it is clear that on one else
can appear in any proceeding under the
Act   except   a    representative     of
employees; but the authorities are
empowered to permit anyone to appear
                                             4

whether he be an employee or not, if
they consider it expedient for the
ends of justice (and we have no doubt
that where representative of employees
does   not   choose     to   appear    the
authorities will generally permit the
employee who has made the application
under s. 42(4) to appear), but this
power is subject to the proviso,
namely, that on one will be allowed to
appear if the Representative Union has
made an appearance. It will be seen
that     the     proviso      puts     the
Representative Union in a special
position   out   of   the   six    classes
mentioned    as     representatives     of
employees in s. 30. Thus s. 32 makes
it clear that where the Representative
Union of the six classes s. 30,
appears   no   one   else   can    appear,
including the persons who might have
made an application under s. 42(4). If
the other five classes which are
mentioned in s. 30 as representatives
of employees appear, the authorities
have the power to allow the employee
or any other person to appear along
with them.


Then we come to s. 33, which starts
with a non-obstante clause and deals
with the appearance of an employee or
a representative union through any
person. Section 33 thus is a exception
to s. 27A and authorises an employees
who could not appear in any proceeding
under the Act except through the
representative of employees under s.
27A, to appear through any person in
certain proceedings mentioned in s.
33, but this again is subject to
provisos, with the first of which we
                                                          4

       are not concerned here. The second
       proviso lays down that no employee
       shall be entitled to appear through
       any person in any proceeding under the
       Act in which the Representative Union
       has appeared as the representative of
       employees. This proviso again gives a
       special position to the Representative
       Union out of the six classes of
       representatives of employees provided
       in s. 30 and makes it clear that
       though an employee may appear in
       certain proceedings specified in s. 33
       through any person in spite of s. 27A,
       he cannot do so where a Representative
       Union     has      appeared      as    the
       representative     of    employees.   Here
       again the position is the same as in
       s.   32;    if   a    representative    of
       employees other than a Representative
       Union has appeared in the proceeding
       the employee can also appear through
       any    person     in    the    proceedings
       mentioned in s. 33; but he cannot did
       so    where    the    representative    of
       employees which has appeared even in
       proceedings    under    s.   33    is  the
       Representative Union".


41.          The Court also held that bona fides or

mala    fides     of    the   representative     Union    has

nothing to do with the complete ban imposed by

the    Act   on   the    appearance   of   any    one    else

except the representative of employees under

Section 30 of the Act.
                                                        4
42.       It     was     argued      that     if       such

interpretation     is    accepted,   there     would     be

tyranny   of     the    Representative      Union.     This

Court, however, negatived even that argument

and   observed    that   the   so-called     tyranny     or

motive of Representative Union cannot change

the legal position and it has no relevance if

the intention of the Legislature is clear and

unambiguous.

43.            The Court, therefore, concluded;

      "The result therefore of taking ss.
      27A, 32 and 33 together is that s. 27A
      first places a complete ban on the
      appearance    of    an    employee   in
      proceedings under the Act once it has
      commenced     except     through    the
      representative of employees. But there
      are   two   exceptions   to   this  ban
      contained in ss. 32 and 33. Section 32
      is concerned with all proceedings
      before the authorities and gives power
      to the authorities under the Act to
      permit an employee himself to appears
      even   though    a   representative  of
      employees may have appeared but his
      permission cannot be granted where the
      representative Union has appeared as a
      representative of employees. Section
      33 which is the other exception allows
      an employee to appear through any
      person in certain proceedings only
      even   though    a   representative  of
      employees might have appeared; but
                                              5

here again it is subject to this that
no one else, not even the employee who
might have made the application, will
have   the   right    to   appear    if   a
Representative     Union    has    put   in
appearance as the representative of
employees. It is quite clear therefore
that the scheme of the Act is that
where a Representative Union appears
in any proceeding under the Act, no
one else can be allowed to appear not
even the employee at whose instance
the proceedings might have begun under
s. 42(4). But where the appearance is
by any representative of employees
other than a Representative Union
authorities under s. 32 can permit the
employee to appear himself in all
proceedings before them and further
the employee is entitled to appear by
any person in certain proceedings
specified in s. 33. But whenever the
Representative    Union    has    made   an
appearance, even the employee cannot
appear in any proceeding under the act
and   the    representation      must    be
confined only to the representative
Union. The complete ban therefore laid
by s. 27A on representation otherwise
than   through   a    representative     of
employees remains complete where the
representative of employees is the
Representative      Union      that     has
appeared; but if the representative of
employees that has appeared is other
than the Representative Union then ss.
32 and 33 provide for exceptions with
which we have already dealt. There can
therefore   be   no    escape    from   the
conclusion    that    the    Act    plainly
intends that where the Representative
Union appears in any proceeding under
the Act even though that proceeding
                                                                         5

      might have commenced by an employee
      under s. 42(4) of the Act, the
      Representative   Union     alone  can
      represent    the  employee    and the
      employee cannot appear or act in such
      proceeding".


44.        Again, in Textile Labour Association,

Bhadra,      Ahmedabad         v.       Ahmedabad       Mill    Owners

Association, Ahmedabad, (1970) 3 SCC 890, this

Court held that once Representative Union of

Textile Industry in the local area of Ahmedabad

entered      into       a     compromise,         such    compromise

would     bind      all        the       employees        and       those

employees         who        are        not     members        of        the

Representative Union cannot contend that they

are against such compromise and are not bound

by it.

45.        In       Santuram             Khudai      v.     Kimatrai

Printers &amp; Processors Pvt. Ltd. &amp; Ors., (1978)

1 SCC 162, a similar question arose. The Court

reiterated the law laid down in Girja Shankar

and   held    that          once   the    Representative            Union

appears      on     behalf         of     the     employees         in       a

proceeding        before       a    Labour      Court     under      1946
                                                                     5

Act, individual workman has no locus standi.

According    to    the     Court,       combined          reading     of

Sections 27A, 30, 32, 33 and 80 of the Act make

it clear that consistent with the avowed policy

and prevention of exploitation of workmen and

augmentation       of    their       bargaining       power,         the

Legislature       has     clothed           the   Representative

Union with plenary power to appear or act on

behalf of employees in any proceeding under the

Act. Keeping in view the said object, it has

deprived individual employees or workmen of the

right to appear or act in any proceeding under

the Act where the Representative Union enters

appearance    or     acts       as    representative            of   the

employees.

46.      Following          Girja          Shankar,       the    Court

observed that mala fides or bona fides of the

Representative          Union        has     no   relevance           in

construing the relevant provisions of the Act.

In    case     the        employees           find        that       the

Representative          Union    is    acting        in    a     manner

which is prejudicial to their interests, their
                                                               5

remedy      lies    in    invoking       the     aid    of    the

Registrar      under      Chapter        III    of     the     Act

requesting him to cancel the registration of

the union.

47.         Respondent      No.8        in     its     affidavit

asserted     that    it    is   a      Representative        Union

under the Act of 1946, in Textile Industry in

Sholapur     Municipal      Corporation        Area.     It   was

further stated that once a Representative Union

exists in any industry in a given local area,

it alone has the exclusive right to represent

the entire class of workmen in that industry in

the concerned local area.               In the instant case

in    the    local       area     of     Solapur       District,

respondent No. 8 is admittedly the only Union

which has the status of Representative Union in

Textile Industry under the Act.                In view of the

above    fact,      no    other     Union/Association          of

employees or individual employees have right to

represent the workmen of that industry in that

area.
                                                                    5
48.         In     the        counter-affidavit,             it     was

stated by the Representative Union that there

were about 4500 employees in respondent No.1

Mill when it was closed down in February, 1995.

Within a period of about a decade, 400 workmen

had   already      died.          None   of     them,        however,

received any wages or other benefits because of

the    pendency          of     several       proceedings            in

different        courts.        The    Representative             Union

considered        their        legitimate       grievance           and

thought it proper to get the matter settled if

reasonable        amount       could     be     paid      to      them,

keeping in view well-known saying "one in hand

is better than two on bush".                    They considered

the matter in its entirety, financial condition

of    the   first        respondent-Company,              claim      of

secured and unsecured creditors, a number of

decrees      and         orders        passed        by        various

Authorities        under        different       laws      and       the

properties        of     the    Company.        In     the      larger

interest,        the   Union      decided       to     accept       the

amount of Rs.22.21 crores for workers towards
                                                                    5

full and final settlement.                     By no stretch of

imagination,         such        action        could        be     held

improper, illegal or mala fide. We are of the

view    that   the    approach          adopted       and   decision

taken    by    the   Representative             Union-respondent

No.8 suffers from no infirmity and cannot be

regarded as illegal or otherwise unreasonable.

EQUITABLE JURISDICTION UNDER ARTICLE 136
49.         There    is     one        more     reason      for     not

interfering with the order passed by the High

Court and impugned in the present appeal. The

appellant      has    invoked           Article       136     of    the

Constitution. The said Article does not confer

a   right     of   appeal        on    any     party.    It      merely

confers discretionary power on this Court to

grant special leave to appeal in suitable and

appropriate cases. In several cases, this Court

has held that the provision confers right on a

litigant       merely       to        prefer     an     application

seeking leave to appeal and the discretion is

vested in this Court to grant or refuse such
                                                                 5

leave in its wisdom. In view of the language of

Article 136, this Court is not expected to act

as `regular Court of appeal' settling disputes

by    converting      into     a    `Court     of    Error'.      It

interferes        only         when       justice         demands

intervention       by    the       highest       Court    of     the

country.

50.          It is undoubtedly true that the power

of    this    Court      is    plenary,        overriding        and

extensive and there are no words qualifying,

restricting or limiting that power. The very

conferment of discretionary power defies any

attempt at exhaustive definition of that power.

The power, however, has to be exercised for

doing full and complete justice. But wider the

discretionary         power,       the    more      sparing      its

exercise. Times out of number this Court has

stressed      that      though      parties       promiscuously

provoke        this       jurisdiction,             the        Court

parsimoniously          invokes          the     power         [vide

Sadhanathan v. Arunachalam, (1980) 3 SCC 141].
                                                                5
51.       While exercising power under Article

136 of the Constitution, this Court not only

acts as a Court of law but also as a Court of

equity and hence the power exercised by this

Court    under        Article        136     must        subserve

ultimately the cause of justice. The Court must

decide   all   issues        coming    before       it    on   the

considerations        of    justice,       equity    and       good

conscience.       Legal       formulations          cannot      be

divorced from ground realities, fact-situations

before the Court and the effect of laws on the

human    beings       for     whom     they     are        meant.

Discretionary jurisdiction under Article 136,

therefore, has to be tampered with equity. This

Court would be failing in its duty if it does

not notice equitable considerations.

52.       We   are         reminded    of     the    following

pertinent and instructive observations of Lord

Watson    in     La    Cite      de    Montreal          v.    Les

Eccelesiasticues, (1889) 14 AC 660.

      "Cases   vary  so   widely  in   their
      circumstances that the principle upon
      which an appeal ought to be allowed do
                                                                 5

      not admit of anything approaching to
      exhaustive definition. No rule can be
      laid down which would not necessarily
      be subject to future qualification,
      and an attempt to formulate any such
      rule might therefore prove misleading...
      A case may be of a substantial
      character, may involve matter of great
      public interest, and may raise an
      important question of law, yet the
      judgment from which leave to appeal is
      sought may appear to be plainly right,
      or at least to be unattended with
      sufficient doubt to justify."

53.       As observed by this Court in Statesman

Ltd. v. Workmen, (1976) 2 SCC 223, the very

width   of    the   power      under    Article      136    is       a

warning against its `freewheeling exercise save

in    grave     situations'.           Circumspection        and

circumscription        must,     therefore,       induce     the

Court   to     interfere    with       the    decision     under

challenge only if the extraordinary flaws or

grave injustice or other recognized grounds are

made out.

54.       We    have    elaborately          dealt   with    the

facts   of    the   present     case.        Respondent    No.1--

Company was closed down in February, 1995. It

never started functioning thereafter. Financial
                                                                     5

liability      continued            mounting      up   day    by    day.

There     were       several         secured       and       unsecured

creditors       and       dues      of     workers.      Proceedings

under    SICA       had     been      initiated,        decrees      and

orders were passed against the Company and the

property       owned           by    the      Company        was     not

sufficient          to      clear        up    all       debts       and

liabilities. Keeping in view the entire facts

and    circumstances            that     initially,       tripartite

agreement was entered into between respondent

No.1-Company,              Representative               Union        and

intending purchaser on March 8, 2005, a joint

meeting was held between secured and unsecured

creditors, representatives of the Union, the

Company and the purchaser in April, 2005 and in

that    meeting,         One     Time    Settlement       (OTS)      had

been    reached.         Several        actions    were      taken    in

pursuance      of     the      settlement.        The    amount      was

deposited by the purchaser, dues of creditors

were paid, workers and laborers were informed

and     they    were        also       paid    the      amount.      The

property       was        sold      by     respondent        No.1     to
                                                                  6

respondent No.7 on October 6, 2005, sale was

confirmed on December 6, 2005, possession of

the property was given to respondent No.7 on

December 14, 2005, sale certificate was issued

on January 20, 2006, respondent No.7 got the

property registered in its name on January 30,

2006 by paying stamp duty of Rs.2.25 crores,

secured creditors gave discharge to respondent

No.1-Company     on     March    30,    2007.       By    May    17,

2007,   4054     workers    were       paid    and       the    said

figure, at the time of hearing of this appeal

reached     to   4105.      It    was      also      stated       by

respondent       No.7-purchaser            that      plant        and

machinery      were     removed      and      sold       as    scrap

materials.

55.       If, at this stage, we set aside sale

in favour of respondent No.7, serious prejudice

will be caused not only to respondent No.1 and

respondent            No.7--vendor            and             vendee,

respectively, but also to others like banks,

financial      institutions,       other       creditors         and

also to workers for whose benefit and welfare
                                                                         6

the appellant is fighting. It is pertinent to

note that no secured or unsecured creditor has

come forward making grievance that though he

was entitled to more amount, he has not been

paid   such      amount.         So     far        as     workers       are

concerned, we have already dealt with rights of

Representative-Union in detail and have held

that the Representative Union has preferential

right to appear in the proceedings under the

Act. Hence, taking any view of the matter, in

our opinion, this is not a fit case to exercise

discretionary and equitable jurisdiction under

Article 136 of the Constitution.

FINAL ORDER

56.        For      the    forgoing           reasons,          in      our

opinion,      the       appeal        has     no        substance.        It

deserves      to     be     dismissed              and     is        hereby

dismissed.         On      the         facts        and         in      the

circumstances of the case, however, there shall

be no order as to costs.


                                        .................................J.
                                                   6

                  (C.K. THAKKER)



NEW DELHI,        ..................................J.
July 11 , 2008.   (D.K. JAIN)

